1. Prog Neurobiol. 2013 Sep;108:21-43. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.06.004. Epub 
2013 Jul 11.

Decoding Alzheimer's disease from perturbed cerebral glucose metabolism: 
implications for diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.

Chen Z(1), Zhong C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an age-related devastating neurodegenerative 
disorder, which severely impacts on the global economic development and 
healthcare system. Though AD has been studied for more than 100 years since 
1906, the exact cause(s) and pathogenic mechanism(s) remain to be clarified. 
Also, the efficient disease-modifying treatment and ideal diagnostic method for 
AD are unavailable. Perturbed cerebral glucose metabolism, an invariant 
pathophysiological feature of AD, may be a critical contributor to the 
pathogenesis of this disease. In this review, we firstly discussed the features 
of cerebral glucose metabolism in physiological and pathological conditions. 
Then, we further reviewed the contribution of glucose transportation abnormality 
and intracellular glucose catabolism dysfunction in AD pathophysiology, and 
proposed a hypothesis that multiple pathogenic cascades induced by impaired 
cerebral glucose metabolism could result in neuronal degeneration and 
consequently cognitive deficits in AD patients. Among these pathogenic 
processes, altered functional status of thiamine metabolism and brain insulin 
resistance are highly emphasized and characterized as major pathogenic 
mechanisms. Finally, considering the fact that AD patients exhibit cerebral 
glucose hypometabolism possibly due to impairments of insulin signaling and 
altered thiamine metabolism, we also discuss some potential possibilities to 
uncover diagnostic biomarkers for AD from abnormal glucose metabolism and to 
develop drugs targeting at repairing insulin signaling impairment and correcting 
thiamine metabolism abnormality. We conclude that glucose metabolism abnormality 
plays a critical role in AD pathophysiological alterations through the induction 
of multiple pathogenic factors such as oxidative stress, mitochondrial 
dysfunction, and so forth. To clarify the causes, pathogeneses and consequences 
of cerebral hypometabolism in AD will help break the bottleneck of current AD 
study in finding ideal diagnostic biomarker and disease-modifying therapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.06.004
PMID: 23850509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Neurology. 2010 Jan 19;74(3):201-9. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181cb3e25. Epub 2009 
Dec 30.

Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI): clinical characterization.

Petersen RC(1), Aisen PS, Beckett LA, Donohue MC, Gamst AC, Harvey DJ, Jack CR 
Jr, Jagust WJ, Shaw LM, Toga AW, Trojanowski JQ, Weiner MW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA. peter8@mayo.edu

BACKGROUND: Neuroimaging measures and chemical biomarkers may be important 
indices of clinical progression in normal aging and mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) and need to be evaluated longitudinally.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize cross-sectionally and longitudinally clinical 
measures in normal controls, subjects with MCI, and subjects with mild Alzheimer 
disease (AD) to enable the assessment of the utility of neuroimaging and 
chemical biomarker measures.
METHODS: A total of 819 subjects (229 cognitively normal, 398 with MCI, and 192 
with AD) were enrolled at baseline and followed for 12 months using standard 
cognitive and functional measures typical of clinical trials.
RESULTS: The subjects with MCI were more memory impaired than the cognitively 
normal subjects but not as impaired as the subjects with AD. Nonmemory cognitive 
measures were only minimally impaired in the subjects with MCI. The subjects 
with MCI progressed to dementia in 12 months at a rate of 16.5% per year. 
Approximately 50% of the subjects with MCI were on antidementia therapies. There 
was minimal movement on the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive 
Subscale for the normal control subjects, slight movement for the subjects with 
MCI of 1.1, and a modest change for the subjects with AD of 4.3. Baseline CSF 
measures of Abeta-42 separated the 3 groups as expected and successfully 
predicted the 12-month change in cognitive measures.
CONCLUSION: The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative has successfully 
recruited cohorts of cognitively normal subjects, subjects with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), and subjects with Alzheimer disease with anticipated baseline 
characteristics. The 12-month progression rate of MCI was as predicted, and the 
CSF measures heralded progression of clinical measures over 12 months.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181cb3e25
PMCID: PMC2809036
PMID: 20042704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Brain. 2020 Jun 1;143(6):1920-1933. doi: 10.1093/brain/awaa137.

Development and validation of an interpretable deep learning framework for 
Alzheimer's disease classification.

Qiu S(1)(2), Joshi PS(3), Miller MI(1), Xue C(1), Zhou X(2), Karjadi C(4), Chang 
GH(1), Joshi AS(5), Dwyer B(6), Zhu S(6), Kaku M(6), Zhou Y(7), Alderazi 
YJ(8)(9), Swaminathan A(10), Kedar S(10), Saint-Hilaire MH(6), Auerbach 
SH(4)(6), Yuan J(7), Sartor EA(6), Au R(3)(4)(6)(11)(12), Kolachalama 
VB(1)(12)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Section of Computational Biomedicine, Department of Medicine, Boston 
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)College of Arts and Sciences, Boston University, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(4)The Framingham Heart Study, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(5)College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
(8)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, 
TX, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, 
Lubbock, TX, USA.
(10)Department of Neurological Sciences, College of Medicine, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(11)Department of Epidemiology, Boston University School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(12)Boston University Alzheimer's Disease Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(13)Whitaker Cardiovascular Institute, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(14)Hariri Institute for Computing and Computational Science & Engineering, 
Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.

Alzheimer's disease is the primary cause of dementia worldwide, with an 
increasing morbidity burden that may outstrip diagnosis and management capacity 
as the population ages. Current methods integrate patient history, 
neuropsychological testing and MRI to identify likely cases, yet effective 
practices remain variably applied and lacking in sensitivity and specificity. 
Here we report an interpretable deep learning strategy that delineates unique 
Alzheimer's disease signatures from multimodal inputs of MRI, age, gender, and 
Mini-Mental State Examination score. Our framework linked a fully convolutional 
network, which constructs high resolution maps of disease probability from local 
brain structure to a multilayer perceptron and generates precise, intuitive 
visualization of individual Alzheimer's disease risk en route to accurate 
diagnosis. The model was trained using clinically diagnosed Alzheimer's disease 
and cognitively normal subjects from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) dataset (n = 417) and validated on three independent cohorts: 
the Australian Imaging, Biomarker and Lifestyle Flagship Study of Ageing (AIBL) 
(n = 382), the Framingham Heart Study (n = 102), and the National Alzheimer's 
Coordinating Center (NACC) (n = 582). Performance of the model that used the 
multimodal inputs was consistent across datasets, with mean area under curve 
values of 0.996, 0.974, 0.876 and 0.954 for the ADNI study, AIBL, Framingham 
Heart Study and NACC datasets, respectively. Moreover, our approach exceeded the 
diagnostic performance of a multi-institutional team of practicing neurologists 
(n = 11), and high-risk cerebral regions predicted by the model closely tracked 
post-mortem histopathological findings. This framework provides a clinically 
adaptable strategy for using routinely available imaging techniques such as MRI 
to generate nuanced neuroimaging signatures for Alzheimer's disease diagnosis, 
as well as a generalizable approach for linking deep learning to 
pathophysiological processes in human disease.

© The Author(s) (2020). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awaa137
PMCID: PMC7296847
PMID: 32357201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2023 Jul 25;23(1):137. doi: 
10.1186/s12911-023-02238-9.

XGBoost-SHAP-based interpretable diagnostic framework for alzheimer's disease.

Yi F(#)(1), Yang H(#)(1), Chen D(1), Qin Y(1), Han H(1), Cui J(1), Bai W(1), Ma 
Y(1), Zhang R(1), Yu H(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Statistics, School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical 
University, 56 South XinJian Road, Taiyuan, 030001, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Health Statistics, School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical 
University, 56 South XinJian Road, Taiyuan, 030001, P.R. China. yu@sxmu.edu.cn.
(3)Shanxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Major Diseases Risk Assessment, Taiyuan, 
China. yu@sxmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Due to the class imbalance issue faced when Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
develops from normal cognition (NC) to mild cognitive impairment (MCI), present 
clinical practice is met with challenges regarding the auxiliary diagnosis of AD 
using machine learning (ML). This leads to low diagnosis performance. We aimed 
to construct an interpretable framework, extreme gradient boosting-Shapley 
additive explanations (XGBoost-SHAP), to handle the imbalance among different AD 
progression statuses at the algorithmic level. We also sought to achieve 
multiclassification of NC, MCI, and AD.
METHODS: We obtained patient data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) database, including clinical information, neuropsychological 
test results, neuroimaging-derived biomarkers, and APOE-ε4 gene statuses. First, 
three feature selection algorithms were applied, and they were then included in 
the XGBoost algorithm. Due to the imbalance among the three classes, we changed 
the sample weight distribution to achieve multiclassification of NC, MCI, and 
AD. Then, the SHAP method was linked to XGBoost to form an interpretable 
framework. This framework utilized attribution ideas that quantified the impacts 
of model predictions into numerical values and analysed them based on their 
directions and sizes. Subsequently, the top 10 features (optimal subset) were 
used to simplify the clinical decision-making process, and their performance was 
compared with that of a random forest (RF), Bagging, AdaBoost, and a naive Bayes 
(NB) classifier. Finally, the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC) 
dataset was employed to assess the impact path consistency of the features 
within the optimal subset.
RESULTS: Compared to the RF, Bagging, AdaBoost, NB and XGBoost (unweighted), the 
interpretable framework had higher classification performance with accuracy 
improvements of 0.74%, 0.74%, 1.46%, 13.18%, and 0.83%, respectively. The 
framework achieved high sensitivity (81.21%/74.85%), specificity 
(92.18%/89.86%), accuracy (87.57%/80.52%), area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve (AUC) (0.91/0.88), positive clinical utility index 
(0.71/0.56), and negative clinical utility index (0.75/0.68) on the ADNI and 
NACC datasets, respectively. In the ADNI dataset, the top 10 features were found 
to have varying associations with the risk of AD onset based on their SHAP 
values. Specifically, the higher SHAP values of CDRSB, ADAS13, ADAS11, ventricle 
volume, ADASQ4, and FAQ were associated with higher risks of AD onset. 
Conversely, the higher SHAP values of LDELTOTAL, mPACCdigit, RAVLT_immediate, 
and MMSE were associated with lower risks of AD onset. Similar results were 
found for the NACC dataset.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed interpretable framework contributes to achieving 
excellent performance in imbalanced AD multiclassification tasks and provides 
scientific guidance (optimal subset) for clinical decision-making, thereby 
facilitating disease management and offering new research ideas for optimizing 
AD prevention and treatment programs.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-023-02238-9
PMCID: PMC10369804
PMID: 37491248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
report.


5. JAMA Neurol. 2023 Jul 31;80(9):969-79. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2023.2338. Online 
ahead of print.

Prevalence and Clinical Implications of a β-Amyloid-Negative, Tau-Positive 
Cerebrospinal Fluid Biomarker Profile in Alzheimer Disease.

Erickson P(1), Simrén J(1)(2), Brum WS(1)(3), Ennis GE(4)(5), Kollmorgen G(6), 
Suridjan I(6), Langhough R(4)(5), Jonaitis EM(4)(5), Van Hulle CA(4)(5), 
Betthauser TJ(4)(5), Carlsson CM(4)(5)(7)(8), Asthana S(4)(5)(7)(8), Ashton 
NJ(1)(9)(10)(11), Johnson SC(4)(5), Shaw LM(12), Blennow K(1)(2), Andreasson 
U(1)(2), Bendlin BB(4), Zetterberg H(1)(2)(4)(13)(14)(15); ADNI Cohort.

Collaborators: Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Trojanowki 
JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Shaw LM, Liu E, Montine 
T, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, Harvey D, 
Bernstein M, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, 
Senjem M, Vemuri P, Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward C, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, 
Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Taylor Reinwald L, Lee V, 
Korecka M, Figurski M, Crawford K, Neu S, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, Kelley F, 
Kim S, Nho K, Kachaturian Z, Frank R, J Snyder PJ, Molchan S, Kaye J, Quinn J, 
Lind B, Carter R, Dolen S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Teodoro L, M 
Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Fleisher A, Heidebrink JL, Lord JL, Mason S, 
Albers C, Knopman D, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva Meyer J, Chowdhury M, 
Rountree S, Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Ances B, Morris JC, Carroll M, 
Leon S, Mintun MA, Schneider S, OliverNG A, Griffith R, Clark D, Geldmacher D, 
Brockington J, Roberson E, Grossman H, Mitsis E, deToledo-Morrell L, Shah RC, 
Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Roberts P, Albert M, Onyike C, D'Agostino D 2nd, 
Kielb S, Galvin JE, Pogorelec DM, Cerbone B, Michel CA, Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, 
Glodzik L, De Santi S, Murali Doraiswamy P, R Petrella J, Z Wong T, E Arnold S, 
H Karlawish J, Wolk D, D Smith C, Jicha G, Hardy P, Sinha P, Oates E, Conrad G, 
Lopez O, Oakley M, Simpson D, Porsteinsson A, Goldstein B, Martin K, Makino K, 
Saleem Ismail M, Brand C, Mulnard R, Thai G, Mc Adams Ortiz C, Womack K, Mathews 
D, Quiceno M, Diaz Arrastia R, King R, Weiner M, Martin Cook K, DeVous M, Levey 
A, Lah J, Cellar J, Burns J, Anderson H, Swerdlow R, Apostolova L, Tingus K, Woo 
E, Silverman D, Lu P, Bartzokis G, Graff Radford N, ParfittH F, Kendall T, 
Johnson H, Farlow M, Marie Hake A, Matthews B, Herring S, Hunt C, van Dyck C, 
Carson R, MacAvoy MG, Chertkow H, Bergman H, Hosein C, Black S, Stefanovic B, 
Caldwell C, Yuek Robin Hsiung G, Feldman H, Mudge B, Assaly Past M, Kertesz A, 
Rogers J, Trost D, Bernick C, Munic D, Kerwin D, Marsel Mesulam M, Lipowski K, 
Kuo Wu C, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Scott Turner R, Johnson 
K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall G, Frey M, Yesavage J, Taylor 
JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh MN, Belden CM, Jacobson SA, Sirrel 
SA, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Lynn Johnson P, Obisesan TO, 
Wolday S, Allard J, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Hudson L, Fletcher E, Carmichael O, 
Olichney J, DeCarli C, Kittur S, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana 
S, Carlsson CM, G Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, Tariot P, Reeder S, Bates V, 
Capote H, Rainka M, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Adeli A, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, 
Brown AD, Pearlson GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Santulli RB, Kitzmiller TJ, Schwartz 
ES, SinkS KM, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Querfurth H, Tremont G, 
Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Mintzer J, Spicer K, 
Bachman D, Finger E, Pasternak S, Rachinsky I, Drost D, Pomara N, Hernando R, 
Sarrael A, Schultz SK, Boles Ponto LL, Shim H, Elizabeth Smith K, Relkin N, 
Chaing G, Raudin L, Smith A, Fargher K, Ashok Raj B.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Department of Psychiatry and 
Neurochemistry, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, 
Sweden.
(2)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Graduate Program in Biological Sciences: Biochemistry, Universidade Federal 
do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(4)School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison.
(5)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison.
(6)Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Penzberg, Germany.
(7)Division of Geriatrics and Gerontology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison.
(8)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center of the Wm. S. Middleton 
Memorial Veterans Hospital, Madison, Wisconsin.
(9)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, Maurice Wohl Institute 
Clinical Neuroscience Institute, King's College London, London, England.
(10)NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health and Biomedical Research 
Unit for Dementia at South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation, London, England.
(11)Centre for Age-Related Medicine, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, 
Norway.
(12)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia.
(13)Institute of Neurology, Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, University 
College London, London, England.
(14)UK Dementia Research Institute, University College London, London, England.
(15)Hong Kong Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hong Kong, China.

IMPORTANCE: Knowledge is lacking on the prevalence and prognosis of individuals 
with a β-amyloid-negative, tau-positive (A-T+) cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
biomarker profile.
OBJECTIVE: To estimate the prevalence of a CSF A-T+ biomarker profile and 
investigate its clinical implications.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This was a retrospective cohort study of the 
cross-sectional multicenter University of Gothenburg (UGOT) cohort (November 
2019-January 2021), the longitudinal multicenter Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) cohort (individuals with mild cognitive impairment [MCI] and 
no cognitive impairment; September 2005-May 2022), and 2 Wisconsin cohorts, 
Wisconsin Alzheimer Disease Research Center and Wisconsin Registry for Alzheimer 
Prevention (WISC; individuals without cognitive impairment; February 
2007-November 2020). This was a multicenter study, with data collected from 
referral centers in clinical routine (UGOT) and research settings (ADNI and 
WISC). Eligible individuals had 1 lumbar puncture (all cohorts), 2 or more 
cognitive assessments (ADNI and WISC), and imaging (ADNI only) performed on 2 
separate occasions. Data were analyzed on August 2022 to April 2023.
EXPOSURES: Baseline CSF Aβ42/40 and phosphorylated tau (p-tau)181; cognitive 
tests (ADNI: modified preclinical Alzheimer cognitive composite [mPACC]; WISC: 
modified 3-test PACC [PACC-3]). Exposures in the ADNI cohort included 
[18F]-florbetapir amyloid positron emission tomography (PET), magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI), [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose PET (FDG-PET), and cross-sectional 
tau-PET (ADNI: [18F]-flortaucipir, WISC: [18F]-MK6240).
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Primary outcomes were the prevalence of CSF AT 
biomarker profiles and continuous longitudinal global cognitive outcome and 
imaging biomarker trajectories in A-T+ vs A-T- groups. Secondary outcomes 
included cross-sectional tau-PET.
RESULTS: A total of 7679 individuals (mean [SD] age, 71.0 [8.4] years; 4101 male 
[53%]) were included in the UGOT cohort, 970 individuals (mean [SD] age, 73 
[7.0] years; 526 male [54%]) were included in the ADNI cohort, and 519 
individuals (mean [SD] age, 60 [7.3] years; 346 female [67%]) were included in 
the WISC cohort. The prevalence of an A-T+ profile in the UGOT cohort was 4.1% 
(95% CI, 3.7%-4.6%), being less common than the other patterns. Longitudinally, 
no significant differences in rates of worsening were observed between A-T+ and 
A-T- profiles for cognition or imaging biomarkers. Cross-sectionally, A-T+ had 
similar tau-PET uptake to individuals with an A-T- biomarker profile.
CONCLUSION AND RELEVANCE: Results suggest that the CSF A-T+ biomarker profile 
was found in approximately 5% of lumbar punctures and was not associated with a 
higher rate of cognitive decline or biomarker signs of disease progression 
compared with biomarker-negative individuals.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2023.2338
PMCID: PMC10391361
PMID: 37523162

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Ennis 
reported receiving grants from National Institute on Aging during the conduct of 
the study. Dr Kollmorgen reported being a full-time employee of Roche 
Diagnostics GmbH during the conduct of the study. Dr Langhough reported 
receiving grants from National Institutes of Health during the conduct of the 
study. Dr Jonaitis reported receiving grants from National Institutes of Health 
during the conduct of the study. Dr Betthauser reported receiving grants from 
the University of Wisconsin and National Institutes of Health and speaker 
honoraria from Intermountain Healthcare outside the submitted work. Dr Carlsson 
reported receiving grants from the National Institutes of Health, Eisai, Eli 
Lilly, Veterans Affairs; nonfinancial support from Amarin; data safety 
monitoring board/travel/advisory board honoraria from Alzheimer's Association, 
National Institutes of Health, and American Fed Aging Res Beeson Program outside 
the submitted work. Dr Asthana reported receiving grants from National Institute 
on Aging/National Institutes of Health, Genentech, Merck, Toyoma Chemical, and 
Lundbeck outside the submitted work. Dr Johnson reported receiving grants from 
the National Institutes of Health and Cerveau and consultant fees from Roche 
Diagnostics, Merck, and ALZpath outside the submitted work. Dr Shaw reported 
receiving grants from the National Institute on Aging and teaching honoraria 
from Biogen outside the submitted work. Dr Blennow reported serving as a 
consultant and at advisory boards for Acumen, ALZPath, BioArctic, Biogen, Eisai, 
Julius Clinical, Lilly, Novartis, Ono Pharma, Prothena, Roche Diagnostics, and 
Siemens Healthineers; serving at data monitoring committees for Julius Clinical 
and Novartis; giving lectures, producing educational materials, and 
participating in educational programs for Biogen, Eisai, and Roche Diagnostics; 
and being a co-founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB (BBS), 
which is a part of the GU Ventures Incubator Program, outside the work. Dr 
Bendlin reported receiving grants from the National Institutes of Health during 
the conduct of the study. Dr Zetterberg reported receiving personal/advisory 
board fees from AbbVie, Acumen, Alector, Alzinova, ALZPath, Annexon, Apellis, 
Artery Therapeutics, AZTherapies, CogRx, Denali, Eisai, Nervgen, Novo Nordisk, 
Optoceutics, Passage Bio, Pinteon Therapeutics, Prothena, Red Abbey Labs, 
reMYND, Roche, Samumed, Siemens Healthineers, Triplet Therapeutics, and Wave 
Scientific; receiving lecture fees from Cellectricon, Fujirebio, Alzecure, 
Biogen, and Roche outside the submitted work; and being a co-founder of Brain 
Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part of the GU Ventures 
Incubator Program. No other disclosures were reported.


6. Clin Epigenetics. 2021 Oct 15;13(1):191. doi: 10.1186/s13148-021-01179-2.

Association of peripheral blood DNA methylation level with Alzheimer's disease 
progression.

Li QS(1), Vasanthakumar A(2), Davis JW(2), Idler KB(2), Nho K(3), Waring JF(2), 
Saykin AJ(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience, Janssen Research and Development, LLC, 1125 Trenton-Harbourton 
Road, Titusville, NJ, 08560, USA. qli2@its.jnj.com.
(2)Genomics Research Center, AbbVie, North Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Indiana Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Department of Radiology and 
Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

BACKGROUND: Identifying biomarkers associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
progression may enable patient enrichment and improve clinical trial designs. 
Epigenome-wide association studies have revealed correlations between DNA 
methylation at cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) sites and AD pathology and 
diagnosis. Here, we report relationships between peripheral blood DNA 
methylation profiles measured using Infinium® MethylationEPIC BeadChip and AD 
progression in participants from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) cohort.
RESULTS: The rate of cognitive decline from initial DNA sampling visit to 
subsequent visits was estimated by the slopes of the modified Preclinical 
Alzheimer Cognitive Composite (mPACC; mPACCdigit and mPACCtrailsB) and Clinical 
Dementia Rating Scale Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) plots using robust linear regression 
in cognitively normal (CN) participants and patients with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), respectively. In addition, diagnosis conversion status was 
assessed using a dichotomized endpoint. Two CpG sites were significantly 
associated with the slope of mPACC in CN participants (P < 5.79 × 10-8 
[Bonferroni correction threshold]); cg00386386 was associated with the slope of 
mPACCdigit, and cg09422696 annotated to RP11-661A12.5 was associated with the 
slope of CDR-SB. No significant CpG sites associated with diagnosis conversion 
status were identified. Genes involved in cognition and learning were enriched. 
A total of 19, 13, and 5 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) associated 
with the slopes of mPACCtrailsB, mPACCdigit, and CDR-SB, respectively, were 
identified by both comb-p and DMRcate algorithms; these included DMRs annotated 
to HOXA4. Furthermore, 5 and 19 DMRs were associated with conversion status in 
CN and MCI participants, respectively. The most significant DMR was annotated to 
the AD-associated gene PM20D1 (chr1: 205,818,956 to 205,820,014 [13 probes], 
Sidak-corrected P = 7.74 × 10-24), which was associated with both the slope of 
CDR-SB and the MCI conversion status.
CONCLUSION: Candidate CpG sites and regions in peripheral blood were identified 
as associated with the rate of cognitive decline in participants in the ADNI 
cohort. While we did not identify a single CpG site with sufficient clinical 
utility to be used by itself due to the observed effect size, a biosignature 
composed of DNA methylation changes may have utility as a prognostic biomarker 
for AD progression.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13148-021-01179-2
PMCID: PMC8518178
PMID: 34654479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: QSL is an employee of Janssen Research & 
Development, LLC, and may own stock and/or stock options in Johnson & Johnson. 
AV, JWD, KI and JFW are employees of AbbVie and may own stock and/or stock 
options. KN reports no competing interests. AJS receives support from multiple 
NIH grants. He has also received support from Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, a 
subsidiary of Eli Lilly (in kind contribution of PET tracer precursor), Bayer 
Oncology (Scientific Advisory Board), and Springer-Nature Publishing (Editorial 
Office Support as Editor-in-Chief of Brain Imaging and Behavior.


7. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Sep;20(9):6008-6031. doi: 10.1002/alz.14065. Epub 2024 
Jul 28.

Osteopontin: A novel marker of pre-symptomatic sporadic Alzheimer's disease.

Quesnel MJ(1)(2), Labonté A(2)(3), Picard C(2)(3), Bowie DC(1)(2), Zetterberg 
H(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9), Blennow K(4)(5)(10)(11), Brinkmalm A(4)(5), Villeneuve 
S(1)(2)(3), Poirier J(1)(2)(3); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; 
PREVENT‐AD Research Group.

Author information:
(1)McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(2)Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Verdun, Québec, Canada.
(3)Centre for the Studies in the Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease, Douglas 
Mental Health University Institute, Verdun, Québec, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, SU/Sahlgrenska, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
SU/Mölndals sjukhus, Mölndal, Sweden.
(6)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen 
Square, London, UK.
(7)UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, London, UK.
(8)Hong Kong Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hong Kong Science Park, 
Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong, China.
(9)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, University of Wisconsin School 
of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin, USA.
(10)Paris Brain Institute, ICM, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Sorbonne University, 
Paris, France.
(11)Neurodegenerative Disorder Research Center, Division of Life Sciences and 
Medicine, and Department of Neurology, Institute on Aging and Brain Disorders, 
University of Science and Technology of China and First Affiliated Hospital of 
USTC, Hefei, P.R. China.

INTRODUCTION: We investigate the role of osteopontin (OPN) in participants with 
Pre-symptomatic Alzheimer's disease (AD), mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and 
in AD brains.
METHODS: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) OPN, AD, and synaptic biomarker levels were 
measured in 109 cognitively unimpaired (CU), parental-history positive 
Pre-symptomatic Evaluation of Experimental or Novel Treatments for Alzheimer's 
Disease (PREVENT-AD) participants, and in 167 CU and 399 participants with MCI 
from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort. OPN levels 
were examined as a function of amyloid beta (Aβ) and tau positivity. Survival 
analyses investigated the link between OPN and rate of conversion to AD.
RESULTS: In PREVENT-AD, CSF OPN was positively correlated with synaptic 
biomarkers. In PREVENT-AD and ADNI, OPN was elevated in CSF Aβ42/40(+)/total 
tau(+) and CSF Aβ42/40(+)/phosphorylated tau181(+) individuals. In ADNI, OPN was 
increased in Aβ(+) positron emission tomography (PET) and tau(+) PET 
individuals, and associated with an accelerated rate of conversion to AD. OPN 
was elevated in autopsy-confirmed AD brains.
DISCUSSION: Strong associations between CSF OPN and key markers of AD 
pathophysiology suggest a significant role for OPN in tau neurobiology, 
particularly in the early stages of the disease.
HIGHLIGHTS: In the Pre-symptomatic Evaluation of Experimental or Novel 
Treatments for Alzheimer's Disease cohort, we discovered that cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) osteopontin (OPN) levels can indicate early synaptic dysfunction, 
tau deposition, and neuronal loss in cognitively unimpaired elderly with a 
parental history. CSF OPN is elevated in amyloid beta(+) positron emission 
tomography (PET) and tau(+) PET individuals. Elevated CSF OPN is associated with 
an accelerated rate of conversion to Alzheimer's disease (AD). Elevated CSF OPN 
is associated with an accelerated rate of cognitive decline on the Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive subscale 13, Montreal Cognitive Assessment, 
Mini-Mental State Examination, and Clinical Dementia Rating Scale Sum of Boxes. 
OPN mRNA and protein levels are significantly upregulated in the frontal cortex 
of autopsy-confirmed AD brains.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14065
PMCID: PMC11497655
PMID: 39072932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JP serves as a scientific advisor to the 
Alzheimer Society of France. HZ has served on scientific advisory boards and/or 
as a consultant for Abbvie, Acumen, Alector, Alzinova, ALZPath, Annexon, 
Apellis, Artery Therapeutics, AZTherapies, CogRx, Denali, Eisai, Nervgen, Novo 
Nordisk, Optoceutics, Passage Bio, Pinteon Therapeutics, Prothena, Red Abbey 
Labs, reMYND, Roche, Samumed, Siemens Healthineers, Triplet Therapeutics, and 
Wave; has given lectures in symposia sponsored by Cellectricon, Fujirebio, 
Alzecure, Biogen, and Roche; and is a co‐founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in 
Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part of the GU Ventures Incubator Program 
(outside submitted work). KB has served as a consultant and on advisory boards 
for Acumen, ALZPath, BioArctic, Biogen, Eisai, Lilly, Moleac Pte. Ltd, Novartis, 
Ono Pharma, Prothena, Roche Diagnostics, and Siemens Healthineers; has served on 
data monitoring committees for Julius Clinical and Novartis; has given lectures, 
produced educational materials, and participated in educational programs for AC 
Immune, Biogen, Celdara Medical, Eisai, and Roche Diagnostics; and is a 
co‐founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part 
of the GU Ventures Incubator Program, outside the work presented in this paper. 
MJQ, AL, CP, DCB, AB, and SV have nothing to disclose. Author disclosures are 
available in the supporting information.


8. JAMA Psychiatry. 2023 Jul 1;80(7):700-709. doi: 
10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2023.1012.

Association Between False Memories and Delusions in Alzheimer Disease.

McLachlan E(1), Ocal D(2), Burgess N(3)(4), Reeves S(1), Howard R(1); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Trojanowki 
JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris JC, Perrin RJ, Shaw LM, 
Khachaturian Z, Carrillo M, Potter W, Barnes L, Bernard M, González H, Ho C, 
Hsiao JK, Jackson J, Masliah E, Masterman D, Okonkwo O, Perrin R, Ryan L, 
Silverberg N, Fleisher A, Truran Sacrey D, Fockler J, Conti C, Veitch D, Neuhaus 
J, Jin C, Nosheny R, Ashford M, Flenniken D, Kormos A, Montine T, Rafii M, Raman 
R, Jimenez G, Donohue M, Gessert D, Salazar J, Zimmerman C, Cabrera Y, Walter S, 
Miller G, Coker G, Clanton T, Hergesheimer L, Smith S, Adegoke O, Mahboubi P, 
Moore S, Pizzola J, Shaffer E, Sloan B, Harvey D, Forghanian-Arani A, Borowski 
B, Ward C, Schwarz C, Jones D, Gunter J, Kantarci K, Senjem M, Vemuri P, Reid R, 
Fox NC, Malone I, Thompson P, Thomopoulos SI, Nir TM, Jahanshad N, DeCarli C, 
Knaack A, Fletcher E, Tosun-Turgut D, Rossi Chen S, Choe M, Crawford K, 
Yushkevich PA, Das S, Koeppe RA, Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Cairns 
NJ, Householder E, Franklin E, Bernhardt H, Taylor-Reinwald L, Korecka M, 
Figurski M, Neu SN, Nho K, Risacher SL, Apostolova LG, Shen L, Foroud TM, 
Nudelman K, Faber K, Wilmes K, Thal L, Silbert LC, Lind B, Crissey R, Kaye JA, 
Carter R, Dolen S, Quinn J, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Becerra M, Teodoro L, 
Dagerman K, Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Ziolkowski J, Heidebrink JL, 
Zbizek-Nulph L, Lord JL, Mason SS, Albers CS, Knopman D, Johnson K, 
Villanueva-Meyer J, Pavlik V, Pacini N, Lamb A, Kass JSK, Doody RS, Shibley VS, 
Chowdhury M, Rountree S, Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Mintz A, Ances B, Winkfield 
D, Carroll M, Stobbs-Cucchi G, Oliver A, Creech ML, Mintun MA, Schneider S, 
Geldmacher D, Natelson Love M, Griffith R, Clark D, Brockington J, Marson D, 
Grossman H, Goldstein MA, Greenber J, Mitsis E, Shah RC, Lamar M, Samuels P, 
Duara R, Greig-Custo MT, Rodriguez R, Albert M, Onyike C, Farrington L, Rudow S, 
Brichko R, Kielb S, Smith A, Ashok Raj B, Fargher K, Sadowski M, Wisniewski T, 
Shulman M, Faustin A, Rao J, Castro KM, Ulysse A, Chen S, Sheikh MO, 
Singleton-Garvin J, Murali Doraiswamy P, Petrella JR, James O, Wong TZ, 
Borges-Neto S, Karlawish JH, Wolk DA, Vaishnavi S, Clark CM, Arnold SE, Smith 
CD, Jicha GA, El Khouli R, Raslau FD, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, 
Porsteinsson AP, Martin K, Kowalski N, Keltz M, Goldstein BS, Makino KM, Seleem 
Ismail M, Brand C, Thai G, Pierce A, Yanez B, Sosa E, Witbracht M, Kelley B, 
Nguyen T, Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, Hajjar I, Cellar JS, 
Burns JM, Swerdlow RH, Brooks WM, Silverman DHS, Kremen S, Apostolova L, Tingus 
K, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, Woo E, Teng E, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Poki-Walker 
K, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews BR, Brosch JR, Herring S, van Dyck CH, Mecca AP, 
Good SP, MacAvoy MG, Carson RE, Varma P, Chertkow H, Vaitekunis S, Hosein C, 
Black S, Stefanovic B, Heyn CC, Robin Hsiung GY, Kim E, Mudge B, Sossi V, 
Feldman H, Assaly M, Finger E, Pasternak S, Rachinsky I, Kertesz A, Drost D, 
Rogers J, Grant I, Muse B, Rogalski E, Robson J, Marsel Mesulam M, Kerwin D, Wu 
CK, Johnson N, Liposki K, Weintraub S, Bonakdarpour B, Pomara N, Hernando R, 
Sarrael A, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Perry D, Scott Turner R, Johnson K, Reynolds B, 
McCann K, Poe J, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall GA, Yesavage J, Taylor JL, 
Chao S, Coleman J, White JD, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Belden CM, Atri A, 
Clark KA, Zamrini E, Sabbagh M, Killiany R, Stern R, Mez J, Kowall N, Budson AE, 
Obisesan TO, Ntekim OE, Wolday S, Khan JI, Nwulia E, Nadarajah S, Lerner A, 
Ogrocki P, Tatsuoka C, Fatica P, Maillard P, Olichney J, Carmichael O, Bates V, 
Capote H, Rainka M, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson 
CM, Perrin A, Burke A, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Tarawneh R, Hart D, Zimmerman EA, 
Celmins D, Miller DD, Boles LL, Ekstam Smith K, Koleva H, Shim H, Won Nam K, 
Schultz SK, Williamson JD, Craft S, Cleveland J, Yang M, Sink KM, Ott BR, Drake 
J, Tremont G, Daielllo LA, Ritter A, Bernick C, Munic D, O'Connelll A, Mintzer 
J, Wiliams A, Masdeu J, Shi J, Garcia A, Newhouse P, Potkin S, Salloway S, 
Malloy P, Correia S, Kittur S, Pearlson GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Flashman LA, 
Seltzer M, Hynes ML, Santulli RB, Relkin N, Chiang G, Lin M, Ravdin L, Lee A, 
Neylan T, Grafman J, Danowski S, Nguyen-Barrera C, Hayes J, Finley S, Bernstein 
M, Foster N, Kim S, Sood A, Blanchard KS, Arfanakis K, Fleischman D, Varon D, 
Reist C, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Peskind ER, Petrie EC, Li G, Mackin 
S, Drake E, Nelson C, Bikford D, Butters M, Zmuda M, Reyes D, Ho Au Y, Scherer 
K, Catalinotto D, Stark S, Ong E, Fernandez D.

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychiatry, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Dementia Research Centre, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)UCL Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience and UCL Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom.

IMPORTANCE: Understanding the mechanisms of delusion formation in Alzheimer 
disease (AD) could inform the development of therapeutic interventions. It has 
been suggested that delusions arise as a consequence of false memories.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether delusions in AD are associated with false 
recognition, and whether higher rates of false recognition and the presence of 
delusions are associated with lower regional brain volumes in the same brain 
regions.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Since the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) launched in 2004, it has amassed an archive of longitudinal 
behavioral and biomarker data. This cross-sectional study used data downloaded 
in 2020 from ADNI participants with an AD diagnosis at baseline or follow-up. 
Data analysis was performed between June 24, 2020, and September 21, 2021.
EXPOSURE: Enrollment in the ADNI.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The main outcomes included false recognition, 
measured with the 13-item Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive 
Subscale (ADAS-Cog 13) and the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT) and 
volume of brain regions corrected for total intracranial volume. Behavioral data 
were compared for individuals with delusions in AD and those without using 
independent-samples t tests or Mann-Whitney nonparametric tests. Significant 
findings were further explored using binary logistic regression modeling. For 
neuroimaging data region of interest analyses using t tests, Poisson regression 
modeling or binary logistic regression modeling and further exploratory, 
whole-brain voxel-based morphometry analyses were carried out to explore the 
association between regional brain volume and false recognition or presence of 
delusions.
RESULTS: Of the 2248 individuals in the ADNI database, 728 met the inclusion 
criteria and were included in this study. There were 317 (43.5%) women and 411 
(56.5%) men. Their mean (SD) age was 74.8 (7.4) years. The 42 participants with 
delusions at baseline had higher rates of false recognition on the ADAS-Cog 13 
(median score, 3; IQR, 1 to 6) compared with the 549 control participants 
(median score, 2; IQR, 0 to 4; U = 9398.5; P = .04). False recognition was not 
associated with the presence of delusions when confounding variables were 
included in binary logistic regression models. An ADAS-Cog 13 false recognition 
score was inversely associated with left hippocampal volume (odds ratio [OR], 
0.91 [95% CI, 0.88-0.94], P < .001), right hippocampal volume (0.94 [0.92-0.97], 
P < .001), left entorhinal cortex volume (0.94 [0.91-0.97], P < .001), left 
parahippocampal gyrus volume (0.93 [0.91-0.96], P < .001), and left fusiform 
gyrus volume (0.97 [0.96-0.99], P < .001). There was no overlap between 
locations associated with false recognition and those associated with delusions.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this cross-sectional study, false memories were 
not associated with the presence of delusions after accounting for confounding 
variables, and no indication for overlap of neural networks for false memories 
and delusions was observed on volumetric neuroimaging. These findings suggest 
that delusions in AD do not arise as a direct consequence of misremembering, 
lending weight to ongoing attempts to delineate specific therapeutic targets for 
treatment of psychosis.

DOI: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2023.1012
PMCID: PMC10209823
PMID: 37223934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.


9. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Aug 10;14:935055. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.935055. 
eCollection 2022.

Hierarchical multi-class Alzheimer's disease diagnostic framework using imaging 
and clinical features.

Qin Y(1), Cui J(1), Ge X(1), Tian Y(2), Han H(1), Fan Z(3), Liu L(1), Luo Y(1), 
Yu H(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Statistics, School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, 
Taiyuan, China.
(3)Center of Translational Medicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanxi 
Medical University, Taiyuan, China.
(4)Shanxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Major Diseases Risk Assessment, Taiyuan, 
China.

Due to the clinical continuum of Alzheimer's disease (AD), the accuracy of early 
diagnostic remains unsatisfactory and warrants further research. The objectives 
of this study were: (1) to develop an effective hierarchical multi-class 
framework for clinical populations, namely, normal cognition (NC), early mild 
cognitive impairment (EMCI), late mild cognitive impairment (LMCI), and AD, and 
(2) to explore the geometric properties of cognition-related anatomical 
structures in the cerebral cortex. A total of 1,670 participants were enrolled 
in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database, comprising 
985 participants (314 NC, 208 EMCI, 258 LMCI, and 205 AD) in the model 
development set and 685 participants (417 NC, 110 EMCI, 83 LMCI, and 75 AD) 
after 2017 in the temporal validation set. Four cortical geometric properties 
for 148 anatomical structures were extracted, namely, cortical thickness (CTh), 
fractal dimension (FD), gyrification index (GI), and sulcus depth (SD). By 
integrating these imaging features with Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
scores at four-time points after the initial visit, we identified an optimal 
subset of 40 imaging features using the temporally constrained group sparse 
learning method. The combination of selected imaging features and clinical 
variables improved the multi-class performance using the AdaBoost algorithm, 
with overall accuracy rates of 0.877 in the temporal validation set. Clinical 
Dementia Rating (CDR) was the primary clinical variable associated with 
AD-related populations. The most discriminative imaging features included the 
bilateral CTh of the dorsal part of the posterior cingulate gyrus, 
parahippocampal gyrus (PHG), parahippocampal part of the medial 
occipito-temporal gyrus, and angular gyrus, the GI of the left inferior segment 
of the insula circular sulcus, and the CTh and SD of the left superior temporal 
sulcus (STS). Our hierarchical multi-class framework underscores the utility of 
combining cognitive variables with imaging features and the reliability of 
surface-based morphometry, facilitating more accurate early diagnosis of AD in 
clinical practice.

Copyright © 2022 Qin, Cui, Ge, Tian, Han, Fan, Liu, Luo and Yu.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.935055
PMCID: PMC9399682
PMID: 36034132

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


10. J Neurol Sci. 2023 Oct 15;453:120812. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2023.120812. Epub 2023 
Sep 22.

Deep learning analysis of UPLC-MS/MS-based metabolomics data to predict 
Alzheimer's disease.

Wang K(1), Theeke LA(2), Liao C(3), Wang N(4), Lu Y(5), Xiao D(6), Xu C(7); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, Health Sciences Center, West Virginia University, 
Morgantown, WV 26506, USA. Electronic address: kesheng.wang@hsc.wvu.edu.
(2)School of Nursing, The George Washington University, Ashburn, VA 20147, USA.
(3)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University, MA 
02215, USA.
(4)Department of Health Policy and Management, School of Public Health, 
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, 
Marshall University, Huntington, WV 25755, USA.
(6)Department of STEM, School of Arts and Sciences, Regis College, Weston, MA 
02493, USA.
(7)Department of Health and Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Professions, 
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, Brownsville, TX 78520, USA. Electronic 
address: chun.xu@utrgv.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Metabolic biomarkers can potentially inform disease progression in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). The purpose of this study is to identify and describe 
a new set of diagnostic biomarkers for developing deep learning (DL) tools to 
predict AD using Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry 
(UPLC-MS/MS)-based metabolomics data.
METHODS: A total of 177 individuals, including 78 with AD and 99 with cognitive 
normal (CN), were selected from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) cohort along with 150 metabolomic biomarkers. We performed feature 
selection using the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO). The 
H2O DL function was used to build multilayer feedforward neural networks to 
predict AD.
RESULTS: The LASSO selected 21 metabolic biomarkers. To develop DL models, the 
21 biomarkers identified by LASSO were imported into the H2O package. The data 
was split into 70% for training and 30% for validation. The best DL model with 
two layers and 18 neurons achieved an accuracy of 0.881, F1-score of 0.892, and 
AUC of 0.873. Several metabolomic biomarkers involved in glucose and lipid 
metabolism, in particular bile acid metabolites, were associated with APOE-ε4 
allele and clinical biomarkers (Aβ42, tTau, pTau), cognitive assessments [the 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale 13 (ADAS13), the 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE)], and hippocampus volume.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified a new set of diagnostic metabolomic 
biomarkers for developing DL tools to predict AD. These biomarkers may help with 
early diagnosis, prognostic risk stratification, and/or early treatment 
interventions for patients at risk for AD.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2023.120812
PMID: 37776718

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.


11. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;84(1):141-149. doi: 10.3233/JAD-210685.

Cognitive Decline in Alzheimer's Disease Is Not Associated with APOE.

Katzourou I(1), Leonenko G(1), Ivanov D(1), Meggy A(2), Marshall R(2), Sims 
R(2), Williams J(1), Holmans P(2), Escott-Price V(1); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)UK Dementia Research Institute, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(2)Division of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff 
University, Cardiff, UK.

BACKGROUND: The rate of cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease (AD) has been 
found to vary widely between individuals, with numerous factors driving this 
heterogeneity.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to compute a measure of cognitive decline in 
patients with AD based on clinical information and to utilize this measure to 
explore the genetic architecture of cognitive decline in AD.
METHODS: An in-house cohort of 616 individuals, hereby termed the Cardiff 
Genetic Resource for AD, as well as a subset of 577 individuals from the 
publicly available ADNI dataset, that have been assessed at multiple timepoints, 
were used in this study. Measures of cognitive decline were computed using 
various mixed effect linear models of Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). 
After an optimal model was selected, a metric of cognitive decline for each 
individual was estimated as the random slope derived from this model. This 
metric was subsequently used for testing the association of cognitive decline 
with apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype.
RESULTS: No association was found between the number of APOEɛ2 or ɛ4 alleles and 
the rate of cognitive decline in either of the datasets examined.
CONCLUSION: Further exploration is required to uncover possible genetic variants 
that affect the rate of decline in patients with AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-210685
PMID: 34487047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Neurology. 2022 Mar 1;98(9):e958-e967. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000013228. Epub 
2021 Dec 22.

Association of CSF Aβ(38) Levels With Risk of Alzheimer Disease-Related Decline.

Cullen N(1), Janelidze S(2), Palmqvist S(2), Stomrud E(2), Mattsson-Carlgren 
N(2), Hansson O(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)From the Clinical Memory Research Unit (N.C., S.J., S.P., E.S., N.M.-C., 
O.H.), Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Faculty of Medicine, and 
Wallenberg Center for Molecular Medicine (N.M.-C.), Lund University; Memory 
Clinic (S.P., E.S., O.H.), Skåne University Hospital, Malmö; and Department of 
Neurology (N.M.-C.), Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. 
nicholas.cullen@med.lu.se.
(2)From the Clinical Memory Research Unit (N.C., S.J., S.P., E.S., N.M.-C., 
O.H.), Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Faculty of Medicine, and 
Wallenberg Center for Molecular Medicine (N.M.-C.), Lund University; Memory 
Clinic (S.P., E.S., O.H.), Skåne University Hospital, Malmö; and Department of 
Neurology (N.M.-C.), Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Experimental studies suggest that the balance between 
short and long β-amyloid (Aβ) species might modulate the toxic effects of Aβ in 
Alzheimer disease (AD), but clinical evidence is lacking. We studied whether 
Aβ38 levels in CSF relate to risk of AD dementia and cognitive decline.
METHODS: CSF Aβ38 levels were measured in 656 individuals across 2 clinical 
cohorts: the Swedish BioFINDER study and the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI). Cox regression models were used to evaluate the association 
between baseline Aβ38 levels and risk of AD dementia in AD biomarker-positive 
individuals (AD+; determined by CSF phosphorylated tau [P-tau]/Aβ42 ratio) with 
subjective cognitive decline (SCD) or mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Linear 
mixed-effects models were used to evaluate the association between baseline Aβ38 
levels and cognitive decline as measured by the Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE) in AD+ participants with SCD, MCI, or AD dementia.
RESULTS: In the BioFINDER cohort, high Aβ38 levels were associated with slower 
decline in MMSE score (β = 0.30 points per SD, p = 0.001) and with lower risk of 
conversion to AD dementia (hazard ratio 0.83 per SD, p = 0.03). In the ADNI 
cohort, higher Aβ38 levels were associated with less decline in MMSE score (β = 
0.27, p = 0.01) but not risk of conversion to AD dementia (p = 0.66). Aβ38 
levels in both cohorts were significantly associated with both cognitive and 
clinical outcomes when further adjusted for CSF P-tau or CSF Aβ42 levels.
DISCUSSION: Higher CSF Aβ38 levels are associated with lower risk of AD-related 
changes in 2 independent clinical cohorts. These findings suggest that 
γ-secretase modulators could be effective as disease-altering therapy.
TRIAL REGISTRATION INFORMATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03174938.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000013228
PMCID: PMC8901176
PMID: 34937781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2022;9(3):400-409. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2022.49.

Prediction of Cognitive Decline for Enrichment of Alzheimer's Disease Clinical 
Trials.

Tam A(1), Laurent C, Gauthier S, Dansereau C.

Author information:
(1)Christian Dansereau, Perceiv Research Inc, Montréal, Canada, 
christian@perceiv.ai.

BACKGROUND: A key issue to Alzheimer's disease clinical trial failures is poor 
participant selection. Participants have heterogeneous cognitive trajectories 
and many do not decline during trials, which reduces a study's power to detect 
treatment effects. Trials need enrichment strategies to enroll individuals who 
are more likely to decline.
OBJECTIVES: To develop machine learning models to predict cognitive trajectories 
in participants with early Alzheimer's disease and presymptomatic individuals 
over 24 and 48 months respectively.
DESIGN: Prognostic machine learning models were trained from a combination of 
demographics, cognitive tests, APOE genotype, and brain imaging data.
SETTING: Data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), 
National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC), Open Access Series of Imaging 
Studies (OASIS-3), PharmaCog, and a Phase 3 clinical trial in early Alzheimer's 
disease were used for this study.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 2098 participants who had demographics, cognitive 
tests, APOE genotype, and brain imaging data, as well as follow-up visits for 
24-48 months were included.
MEASUREMENTS: Baseline magnetic resonance imaging, cognitive tests, 
demographics, and APOE genotype were used to separate decliners, defined as 
individuals whose CDR-Sum of Boxes scores increased during a predefined time 
window, from stable individuals. A prognostic model to predict decline at 24 
months in early Alzheimer's disease was trained on 1151 individuals who had 
baseline diagnoses of mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's dementia from 
ADNI and NACC. This model was validated on 115 individuals from a placebo arm of 
a Phase 3 clinical trial and 76 individuals from the PharmaCog dataset. A second 
prognostic model to predict decline at 48 months in presymptomatic populations 
was trained on 628 individuals from ADNI and NACC who were cognitively 
unimpaired at baseline. This model was validated on 128 individuals from 
OASIS-3.
RESULTS: The models achieved up to 79% area under the curve (cross-validated and 
out-of-sample). Power analyses showed that using prognostic models to recruit 
enriched cohorts of predicted decliners can reduce clinical trial sample sizes 
by as much as 51% while maintaining the same detection power.
CONCLUSIONS: Prognostic tools for predicting cognitive decline and enriching 
clinical trials with participants at the highest risk of decline can improve 
trial quality, derisk endpoint failures, and accelerate therapeutic development 
in Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2022.49
PMID: 35841241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Tam, Dr Laurent, and Dr Dansereau are 
employees of Perceiv Research Inc and hold stocks/stock options in Perceiv 
Research Inc. Dr Gauthier has nothing to disclose.


14. J Mol Neurosci. 2022 May;72(5):1085-1097. doi: 10.1007/s12031-022-01972-5. Epub 
2022 Feb 16.

Associations of ARHGAP26 Polymorphisms with Alzheimer's Disease and 
Cardiovascular Disease.

Wang K(1), Lu Y(2), Morrow DF(3), Xiao D(4)(5), Xu C(6); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Health, School of Nursing, Health Sciences 
Center, West Virginia University, Post Office Box 9600 - Office 6419, 
Morgantown, WV, 26506, USA. kesheng.wang@hsc.wvu.edu.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, 
Marshall University, Huntington, WV, 25755, USA.
(3)School of Social Work, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, 26506, USA.
(4)Department of STEM, School of Arts and Sciences, Regis College, Weston, MA, 
02493, USA.
(5)McLean Imaging Center, McLean Hospital, MA, 02478, Belmont, USA.
(6)Department of Health and Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Professions, 
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, TX, 78520, Brownsville, USA. 
chun.xu@utrgv.edu.

The Rho GTPase activating protein 26 (ARHGAP26) gene has been reported to be 
associated with neuropsychiatric diseases and neurodegenerative diseases 
including Parkinson's disease. We examined whether the ARHGAP26 gene is 
associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and/or cardiovascular disease (CVD). 
Multivariable logistic regression model was used to examine the associations of 
154 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the ARHGAP26 gene with AD and 
CVD using the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 1 (ADNI-1) cohort. 
Fourteen SNPs were associated with AD (top SNP rs3776362 with p = 3.43 × 10-3), 
while 37 SNPs revealed associations with CVD (top SNP rs415235 with 
p = 2.06 × 10-4). Interestingly, 13 SNPs were associated with both AD and CVD. 
SNP rs3776362 was associated with CVD, Functional Activities Questionnaire 
(FAQ), and Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB). A replication study 
using a Caribbean Hispanics sample showed that 17 SNPs revealed associations 
with AD, and 12 SNPs were associated with CVD. The third sample using a 
family-based study design showed that 9 SNPs were associated with AD, and 3 SNPs 
were associated with CVD. SNP rs6836509 within the ARHGAP10 gene (an important 
paralogon of ARHGAP26) was associated with AD and cerebrospinal fluid total tau 
(t-tau) level in the ADNI sample. Several SNPs were functionally important using 
the RegulomeDB, while a number of SNPs were associated with significant 
expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) using Genotype-Tissue Expression 
(GTEx) databases. In conclusion, genetic variants within ARHGAP26 were 
associated with AD and CVD. These findings add important new insights into the 
potentially shared pathogenesis of AD and CVD.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-022-01972-5
PMID: 35171450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Prog Neurobiol. 2013 Nov;110:102-13. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.01.003. Epub 
2013 Apr 8.

Diagnosis and management of Alzheimer's disease: past, present and future 
ethical issues.

Gauthier S(1), Leuzy A, Racine E, Rosa-Neto P.

Author information:
(1)McGill Center for Studies in Aging, Douglas Mental Health Research Institute, 
Montréal, Québec, Canada. Electronic address: serge.gauthier@mcgill.ca.

There is great interest in the ethical issues associated with Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) and related dementias given the prevalence of AD and the evolving 
neuroscience landscape in matters of diagnoses and therapeutics. Much of the 
ethics discussion arises in the tension between the principle of not doing harm 
(principle of non-maleficence) in this vulnerable population and the development 
of effective treatments (principle of beneficence). Autonomy and capacity issues 
are also numerous, wide-ranging, and concern (1) day to day affairs such as 
driving safely and spending money wisely, (2) life-time events such as 
designating a legal representative in case of incapacity, making a will, (3) 
consenting to treatment and diagnostic procedures, (4) participating in 
research. The latter issue is particularly thorny and illustrates well the 
complexity of tackling concerns related to capacity. The impetus to protect AD 
patients has partly led to ethics regulation and policies making research on 
inapt patients more difficult because of stringent requirements for signed 
informed consent or for showing the value of the research to this specific 
patient population. New issues are arising that relate to earlier diagnosis 
using biomarkers and (possibly soon) the use of drugs that modify disease 
progression. We here summarize and discuss the different ethical issues 
associated with AD from a historical perspective, with emphasis on diagnostic 
and treatments issues.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.01.003
PMID: 23578568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Front Big Data. 2021 May 20;4:661110. doi: 10.3389/fdata.2021.661110. 
eCollection 2021.

Inter-Cohort Validation of SuStaIn Model for Alzheimer's Disease.

Archetti D(1), Young AL(2)(3), Oxtoby NP(3), Ferreira D(4)(5), Mårtensson G(4), 
Westman E(4), Alexander DC(3), Frisoni GB(6)(7), Redolfi A(1); for Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative and EuroPOND Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuroinformatics, IRCCS Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio 
Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroimaging, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Computer Science, UCL Centre for Medical Image Computing, 
London, United Kingdom.
(4)Division of Clinical Geriatrics, Center for Alzheimer Research, Department of 
Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(5)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.
(6)Memory Clinic and LANVIE - Laboratory of Neuroimaging of Aging, University 
Hospitals and University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(7)Laboratory of Alzheimer's Neuroimaging and Epidemiology - LANE, IRCCS 
Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder which spans several 
years from preclinical manifestations to dementia. In recent years, interest in 
the application of machine learning (ML) algorithms to personalized medicine has 
grown considerably, and a major challenge that such models face is the 
transferability from the research settings to clinical practice. The objective 
of this work was to demonstrate the transferability of the Subtype and Stage 
Inference (SuStaIn) model from well-characterized research data set, employed as 
training set, to independent less-structured and heterogeneous test sets 
representative of the clinical setting. The training set was composed of MRI 
data of 1043 subjects from the Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI), and the test set was composed of data from 767 subjects from OASIS, 
Pharma-Cog, and ViTA clinical datasets. Both sets included subjects covering the 
entire spectrum of AD, and for both sets volumes of relevant brain regions were 
derived from T1-3D MRI scans processed with Freesurfer v5.3 cross-sectional 
stream. In order to assess the predictive value of the model, subpopulations of 
subjects with stable mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and MCIs that progressed to 
AD dementia (pMCI) were identified in both sets. SuStaIn identified three 
disease subtypes, of which the most prevalent corresponded to the typical 
atrophy pattern of AD. The other SuStaIn subtypes exhibited similarities with 
the previously defined hippocampal sparing and limbic predominant atrophy 
patterns of AD. Subject subtyping proved to be consistent in time for all 
cohorts and the staging provided by the model was correlated with cognitive 
performance. Classification of subjects on the basis of a combination of SuStaIn 
subtype and stage, mini mental state examination and amyloid-β1-42 cerebrospinal 
fluid concentration was proven to predict conversion from MCI to AD dementia on 
par with other novel statistical algorithms, with ROC curves that were not 
statistically different for the training and test sets and with area under curve 
respectively equal to 0.77 and 0.76. This study proves the transferability of a 
SuStaIn model for AD from research data to less-structured clinical cohorts, and 
indicates transferability to the clinical setting.

Copyright © 2021 Archetti, Young, Oxtoby, Ferreira, Mårtensson, Westman, 
Alexander, Frisoni and Redolfi.

DOI: 10.3389/fdata.2021.661110
PMCID: PMC8173213
PMID: 34095821

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


17. J Alzheimers Dis. 2023;95(2):535-548. doi: 10.3233/JAD-230208.

Predicting Progression to Clinical Alzheimer's Disease Dementia Using the Random 
Survival Forest.

Song S(1), Asken B(2)(3)(4), Armstrong MJ(5)(3), Yang Y(6), Li Z(6); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, University of Florida College of Public Health & 
Health Professions and College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Clinical and Health Psychology, University of Florida College 
of Public Health & Health Professions, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(3)Norman Fixel Institute for Neurological Diseases, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(4)University of Florida Center for Cognitive Aging and Memory, McKnight Brain 
Institute, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(5)Departments of Neurology and Health Outcomes & Biomedical Informatics, 
University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(6)Department of Statistics, University of Georgia Franklin College of Arts and 
Sciences, Athens, GA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Assessing the risk of developing clinical Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
dementia, by machine learning survival analysis approaches, among participants 
registered in Alzheimer's Disease Centers is important for AD dementia 
management.
OBJECTIVE: To construct a prediction model for the onset time of clinical AD 
dementia using the National Alzheimer Coordinating Center (NACC) and the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) registered cohorts.
METHODS: A model was constructed using the Random Survival Forest (RSF) approach 
and internally and externally validated on the NACC cohort and the ADNI cohort. 
An R package and a Shiny app were provided for accessing the model.
RESULTS: We built a predictive model having the six predictors: delayed logical 
memory score (story recall), CDR® Dementia Staging Instrument - Sum of Boxes, 
general orientation in CDR®, ability to remember dates and ability to pay bills 
in the Functional Activities Questionnaire, and patient age. The C indices of 
the model were 90.82% (SE = 0.71%) and 86.51% (SE = 0.75%) in NACC and ADNI 
respectively. The time-dependent AUC and accuracy at 48 months were 92.48% 
(SE = 1.12%) and 88.66% (SE = 1.00%) respectively in NACC, and 90.16% 
(SE = 1.12%) and 85.00% (SE = 1.14%) respectively in ADNI.
CONCLUSION: The model showed good prediction performance and the six predictors 
were easy to obtain, cost-effective, and non-invasive. The model could be used 
to inform clinicians and patients on the probability of developing clinical AD 
dementia in 4 years with high accuracy.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-230208
PMCID: PMC10529100
PMID: 37545237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M. Armstrong receives support from the NIH 
(P30AG066506, R01AG068128, R01NS121099, R44AG062072), the Florida Department of 
Health (grant 20A08), and as the local PI of a Lewy Body Dementia Association 
Research Center of Excellence. She serves on the DSMBs for the Alzheimer’s 
Therapeutic Research Institute/Alzheimer’s Clinical Trial Consortium and the 
Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study. She has provided educational content for 
Medscape. All other authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.


18. Brain. 2024 Dec 9:awae388. doi: 10.1093/brain/awae388. Online ahead of print.

Deep learning reveals pathology-confirmed neuroimaging signatures in 
Alzheimer's, vascular and Lewy body dementias.

Wang D(1), Honnorat N(1), Toledo JB(2), Li K(1), Charisis S(1), Rashid T(1), 
Benet Nirmala A(1), Brandigampala SR(1), Mojtabai M(1), Seshadri S(1), Habes 
M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Neuroimage Analytics Laboratory and Biggs Institute Neuroimaging Core, Glenn 
Biggs Institute for Neurodegenerative Disorders, University of Texas Health 
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78229, USA.
(2)Nantz National Alzheimer Center, Stanley Appel Department of Neurology, 
Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(3)Biomedical Image Analytics Division, Research Imaging Institute, University 
of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA.

Concurrent neurodegenerative and vascular pathologies pose a diagnostic 
challenge in the clinical setting, with histopathology remaining the definitive 
modality for dementia-type diagnosis. To address this clinical challenge, we 
introduce a neuropathology-based, data-driven, multi-label deep learning 
framework to identify and quantify in-vivo biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), vascular dementia (VD), and Lewy body dementia (LBD) using antemortem 
T1-weighted MRI scans of 423 demented and 361 control participants from NACC and 
ADNI datasets. Based on the best-performing deep learning model, explainable 
heatmaps are extracted to visualize disease patterns, and the novel Deep 
Signature of Pathology Atrophy REcognition (DeepSPARE) indices are developed, 
where a higher DeepSPARE score indicates more brain alterations associated with 
that specific pathology. A substantial discrepancy in clinical and 
neuropathology diagnosis was observed in the demented patients: 71% of them had 
more than one pathology, but 67% of them were clinically diagnosed as AD only. 
Based on these neuropathology diagnoses and leveraging cross-validation 
principles, the deep learning model achieved the best performance with a 
balanced accuracy of 0.844, 0.839, and 0.623 for AD, VD, and LBD, respectively, 
and was used to generate the explainable deep-learning heatmaps and DeepSPARE 
indices. The explainable deep-learning heatmaps revealed distinct neuroimaging 
brain alteration patterns for each pathology: the AD heatmap highlighted 
bilateral hippocampal regions, the VD heatmap emphasized white matter regions, 
and the LBD heatmap exposed occipital alterations. The DeepSPARE indices were 
validated by examining their associations with cognitive testing, 
neuropathological, and neuroimaging measures using linear mixed-effects models. 
The DeepSPARE-AD index was associated with MMSE, Trail B, memory, 
PFDR-adjustedhippocampal volume, Braak stages, CERAD scores, and Thal phases 
(PFDR-adjusted < 0.05). The DeepSPARE-VD index was associated with white matter 
hyperintensity volume and cerebral amyloid angiopathy (PFDR-adjusted < 0.001). 
The DeepSPARE-LBD index was associated with Lewy body stages (PFDR-adjusted < 
0.05). The findings were replicated in an out-of-sample ADNI dataset by testing 
associations with cognitive, imaging, plasma, and CSF measures. CSF and plasma 
pTau181 were significantly associated with DeepSPARE-AD in the AD/MCIΑβ+ group 
(PFDR-adjusted < 0.001), and CSF α-synuclein was associated solely with 
DeepSPARE-LBD (PFDR-adjusted = 0.036). Overall, these findings demonstrate the 
advantages of our innovative deep-learning framework in detecting antemortem 
neuroimaging signatures linked to different pathologies. The newly deep 
learning-derived DeepSPARE indices are precise, pathology-sensitive, and 
single-valued noninvasive neuroimaging metrics, bridging the traditional widely 
available in-vivo T1 imaging with histopathology.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awae388
PMID: 39657969


19. Healthcare (Basel). 2022 Oct 17;10(10):2045. doi: 10.3390/healthcare10102045.

Examining Cognitive Factors for Alzheimer's Disease Progression Using 
Computational Intelligence.

Thabtah F(1), Ong S(2), Peebles D(3).

Author information:
(1)ASDTests, Auckland 0610, New Zealand.
(2)Digital Technologies, Manukau Institute of Technology, Auckland 0481, New 
Zealand.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Huddersfield, Huddersfield HD1 3DH, 
UK.

Prognosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) progression has been recognized as a 
challenging problem due to the massive numbers of cognitive, and pathological 
features recorded for patients and controls. While there have been many studies 
investigated the diagnosis of dementia using pathological characteristics, 
predicting the advancement of the disease using cognitive elements has not been 
heavily studied particularly using technologies like artificial intelligence and 
machine learning. This research aims at evaluating items of the Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive 13 (ADAS-Cog-13) test to determine key 
cognitive items that influence the progression of AD. A methodology that 
consists of machine learning and feature selection (FS) techniques was designed, 
implemented, and then tested against real data observations (cases and controls) 
of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) repository with a 
narrow scope on cognitive items of the ADAS-Cog-13 test. Results obtained by 
ten-fold cross validation and using dissimilar classification and FS techniques 
revealed that the decision tree algorithm produced classification models with 
the best performing results from the cognitive items. For ADAS-Cog-13 test, 
memory and learning features including word recall, delayed word recall and word 
recognition were the key items pinpointing to AD advancement. When these three 
cognitive items are processed excluding demographics by C4.5 algorithm the 
models derived showed 82.90% accuracy, 87.60% sensitivity and 78.20% 
specificity.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare10102045
PMCID: PMC9601744
PMID: 36292492

Conflict of interest statement: We declare no conflict of interest.


20. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2024 Feb 29;16(1):48. doi: 10.1186/s13195-024-01413-y.

Progression analysis versus traditional methods to quantify slowing of disease 
progression in Alzheimer's disease.

Jönsson L(1), Ivkovic M(2), Atri A(3)(4), Handels R(5)(6), Gustavsson A(5)(7), 
Hahn-Pedersen JH(2), León T(2), Lilja M(7), Gundgaard J(2), Raket LL(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurogeriatrics, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and 
Society, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, 171 64, Sweden. Linus.jonsson@ki.se.
(2)Novo Nordisk A/S, Søborg, Denmark.
(3)Banner Sun Health Research Institute and Banner Alzheimer's Institute, Banner 
Health, Sun City and Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(4)Center for Brain/Mind Medicine, Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Division of Neurogeriatrics, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and 
Society, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, 171 64, Sweden.
(6)Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, School for Mental Health and 
Neuroscience, Department of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, Alzheimer Centre 
Limburg, Maastricht University Medical Centre+, Maastricht, MD, 6200, The 
Netherlands.
(7)Quantify Research, Hantverkargatan 8, Stockholm, 112 21, Sweden.
(8)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The clinical meaningfulness of the effects of recently approved 
disease-modifying treatments (DMT) in Alzheimer's disease is under debate. 
Available evidence is limited to short-term effects on clinical rating scales 
which may be difficult to interpret and have limited intrinsic meaning to 
patients. The main value of DMTs accrues over the long term as they are expected 
to cause a delay or slowing of disease progression. While awaiting such 
evidence, the translation of short-term effects to time delays or slowing of 
progression could offer a powerful and readily interpretable representation of 
clinical outcomes.
METHODS: We simulated disease progression trajectories representing two arms, 
active and placebo, of a hypothetical clinical trial of a DMT. The placebo arm 
was simulated based on estimated mean trajectories of clinical dementia rating 
scale-sum of boxes (CDR-SB) recordings from amyloid-positive subjects with mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) from Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI). The active arm was simulated to show an average slowing of disease 
progression versus placebo of 20% at each visit. The treatment effects in the 
simulated trials were estimated with a progression model for repeated measures 
(PMRM) and a mixed model for repeated measures (MMRM) for comparison. For PMRM, 
the treatment effect is expressed in units of time (e.g., days) and for MMRM in 
units of the outcome (e.g., CDR-SB points). PMRM results were implemented in a 
health economics Markov model extrapolating disease progression and death over 
15 years.
RESULTS: The PMRM model estimated a 19% delay in disease progression at 
18 months and 20% (~ 7 months delay) at 36 months, while the MMRM model 
estimated a 25% reduction in CDR-SB (~ 0.5 points) at 36 months. The PMRM model 
had slightly greater power compared to MMRM. The health economic model based on 
the estimated time delay suggested an increase in life expectancy (10 months) 
without extending time in severe stages of disease.
CONCLUSION: PMRM methods can be used to estimate treatment effects in terms of 
slowing of progression which translates to time metrics that can be readily 
interpreted and appreciated as meaningful outcomes for patients, care partners, 
and health care practitioners.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-024-01413-y
PMCID: PMC10903002
PMID: 38424559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AG is a partner of Quantify Research AB, 
providing consultancy services to pharmaceutical companies and other private and 
public organizations and institutions. ML is an employee of Quantify Research 
AB. LLR is an employee of Eli Lilly and Company. LJ has received research 
funding and consultancy fees from the following pharmaceutical companies: Novo 
Nordisk, Eli Lilly, Eisai and Lundbeck.


21. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Comput Math Methods Med. 2022 May 6;2022:3144035. doi: 10.1155/2022/3144035. 
eCollection 2022.

Prediction of Early Alzheimer Disease by Hippocampal Volume Changes under 
Machine Learning Algorithm.

Shang Q(1), Zhang Q(1), Liu X(1), Zhu L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Zibo Central Hospital, Zibo, 255000 Shandong, China.

Retraction in
    Comput Math Methods Med. 2023 Dec 13;2023:9876953. doi: 
10.1155/2023/9876953.

This research was aimed at discussing the application value of different machine 
learning algorithms in the prediction of early Alzheimer's disease (AD), which 
was based on hippocampal volume changes in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In 
the research, the 84 cases in American Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging 
initiative (ADNI) database were selected as the research data. Based on the 
scoring results of cognitive function, all cases were divided into three groups, 
including cognitive function normal (normal group), early mild cognitive 
impairment (e-MCI group), and later mild cognitive impairment (l-MCI group) 
groups. Each group included 28 cases. The features of hippocampal volume changes 
in MRI images of the patients in different groups were extracted. The samples of 
training set and test set were established. Besides, the established support 
vector machine (SVM), decision tree (DT), and random forest (RF) prediction 
models were used to predict e-MCI. Metalinear regression was utilized to analyze 
MRI feature data, and the predictive accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of 
different models were calculated. The result showed that the volumes of 
hippocampal left CA1, left CA2-3, left CA4-DG, left presubiculum, left tail, 
right CA2-3, right CA4-DG, right presubiculum, and right tail in e-MCI group 
were all smaller than those in normal group (P < 0.01). The corresponding volume 
of hippocampal subregions in l-MCI group was remarkably reduced compared with 
that in normal group (P < 0.001). The volumes of regions left CA1, left CA2-3, 
left CA4-DG, right CA2-3, right CA4-DG, and right presubiculum were all 
positively correlated with logical memory test-delay recall (LMT-DR) score (R 2 
= 0.1702, 0.3779, 0.1607, 0.1620, 0.0426, and 0.1309; P < 0.001). The predictive 
accuracy of training set sample by DT, SVM, and RF was 86.67%, 93.33%, and 
98.33%, respectively. Based on the changes in the volumes of left CA4-DG, right 
CA2-3, and right CA4-DG, the predictive accuracy of e-MCI and l-MCI by RF model 
was both higher than those by DT model (P < 0.01). Besides, the predictive 
accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of e-MCI by RF model was all notably 
higher than those by DT model (P < 0.01). The above results demonstrated that 
the effective early AD prediction models were established by the volume changes 
in hippocampal subregions, which was based on RF in the research. The 
establishment of early AD prediction models offered certain reference basis to 
the diagnosis and treatment of AD patients.

Copyright © 2022 Qun Shang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/3144035
PMCID: PMC9106502
PMID: 35572832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


22. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;90(2):609-624. doi: 10.3233/JAD-220502.

Learning Cognitive-Test-Based Interpretable Rules for Prediction and Early 
Diagnosis of Dementia Using Neural Networks.

Wang Z(1), Wang J(2), Liu N(1), Liu C(2), Li X(1), Dong L(2), Zhang R(1), Mao 
C(2), Duan Z(1), Zhang W(3), Gao J(2), Wang J(1); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 
P.R. China.
(2)Department of Neurology, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare 
Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Shuaifuyuan 1st, Dongcheng District, 
Beijing, P.R. China.
(3)School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, 
Shanghai, P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: Accurate, cheap, and easy to promote methods for dementia prediction 
and early diagnosis are urgently needed in low- and middle-income countries. 
Integrating various cognitive tests using machine learning provides promising 
solutions. However, most effective machine learning models are black-box models 
that are hard to understand for doctors and could hide potential biases and 
risks.
OBJECTIVE: To apply cognitive-test-based machine learning models in practical 
dementia prediction and diagnosis by ensuring both interpretability and 
accuracy.
METHODS: We design a framework adopting Rule-based Representation Learner (RRL) 
to build interpretable diagnostic rules based on the cognitive tests selected by 
doctors. According to the visualization and test results, doctors can easily 
select the final rules after analysis and trade-off. Our framework is verified 
on the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset (n = 606) and 
Peking Union Medical College Hospital (PUMCH) dataset (n = 375).
RESULTS: The predictive or diagnostic rules learned by RRL offer a better 
trade-off between accuracy and model interpretability than other representative 
machine learning models. For mild cognitive impairment (MCI) conversion 
prediction, the cognitive-test-based rules achieve an average area under the 
curve (AUC) of 0.904 on ADNI. For dementia diagnosis on subjects with a normal 
Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) score, the learned rules achieve an AUC of 0.863 
on PUMCH. The visualization analyses also verify the good interpretability of 
the learned rules.
CONCLUSION: With the help of doctors and RRL, we can obtain predictive and 
diagnostic rules for dementia with high accuracy and good interpretability even 
if only cognitive tests are used.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-220502
PMID: 36155512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Brain Sci. 2023 Aug 12;13(8):1195. doi: 10.3390/brainsci13081195.

Associations between Neuropsychiatric Symptoms and Alzheimer's Disease 
Biomarkers in People with Mild Cognitive Impairment.

Arenare G(1), Manca R(1)(2), Caffarra P(1), Venneri A(1)(2), On Behalf Of The 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, 43125 Parma, Italy.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Brunel University London, Uxbridge UB8 3BH, UK.

BACKGROUND: Neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS) are associated with faster decline 
in mild cognitive impairment (MCI). This study aimed to investigate the 
association between NPS severity and Alzheimer's disease (AD) biomarkers, i.e., 
amyloid-β (Aβ), phosphorylated tau protein (p-tau) and hippocampal volume ratio 
(HR), to characterise in more detail MCI patients with a poor prognosis.
METHODS: A total of 506 individuals with MCI and 99 cognitively unimpaired older 
adults were selected from the ADNI dataset. The patients were divided into three 
different groups based on their NPI-Q total scores: no NPS (n = 198), mild NPS 
(n = 160) and severe NPS (n = 148). Regression models were used to assess the 
association between the severity of NPS and each biomarker level and positivity 
status.
RESULTS: Cerebrospinal fluid Aβ levels were positively associated with older age 
and lower MMSE scores, while higher p-tau levels were associated with female sex 
and lower MMSE scores. Only patients with severe NPS had a lower HR (β = -0.18, 
p = 0.050), i.e., more pronounced medio-temporal atrophy, than those without 
NPS.
DISCUSSION: Only HR was associated with the presence of NPS, partially in line 
with previous evidence showing that severe NPS may be explained primarily by 
greater grey matter loss. Future longitudinal studies will be needed to 
ascertain the relevance of this finding.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci13081195
PMCID: PMC10452057
PMID: 37626552

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


24. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2023;10(2):212-222. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2023.13.

Longitudinal Exposure-Response Modeling of Multiple Indicators of Alzheimer's 
Disease Progression.

Polhamus DG(1), Dolton MJ, Rogers JA, Honigberg L, Jin JY, Quartino A.

Author information:
(1)Michael J. Dolton, Roche Products Pty Limited, Sydney, NSW, Australia; 
Telephone: +612 9454 9000; Email: michael.dolton@roche.com.

BACKGROUND: Progression in Alzheimer's disease manifests as changes in multiple 
biomarker, cognitive, and functional endpoints. Disease progression modeling can 
be used to integrate these multiple measures into a synthesized metric of where 
a patient lies within the disease spectrum, allowing for a more dynamic measure 
over the range of the disease.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to combine modeling techniques from psychometric 
research (e.g., item response theory) and pharmacometrics (e.g., hierarchical 
models) to describe the multivariate longitudinal disease progression for 
patients with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease. Additionally, we aimed to 
extend the subsequent model to make it suitable for clinical trial simulation, 
with the inclusion of covariates, to explain variability in latent progression 
(i.e., disease progression) and to aid in the assessment of enrichment 
strategies.
DESIGN: Multiple longitudinal endpoints in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative database were modeled. This model was validated internally using 
visual predictive checks, and externally by comparing data from the placebo arms 
of two Phase 2 crenezumab studies, ABBY (NCT01343966) and BLAZE (NCT01397578).
SETTING: The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative began in 2004: the 
initial 5-year study (ADNI-1) was extended by 2 years in 2009 by a Grand 
Opportunities grant (ADNI-GO), and in 2011 and 2016 by further competitive 
renewals of the ADNI-1 grant (ADNI-2 and ADNI-3, respectively). This work 
studies natural progression data from patients with confirmed Alzheimer's 
disease. The Phase 2 ABBY and BLAZE trials evaluated the safety and efficacy of 
crenezumab in patients with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease.
PARTICIPANTS: From the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative database, 305 
subjects who had a baseline diagnosis of mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease 
were included in modeling. From the ABBY and BLAZE studies, 158 patients were 
included from the studies' placebo arms.
MEASUREMENTS: Longitudinal cognitive and functional assessments modeled included 
the Clinical Dementia Rating (both as Sum of Boxes and individual item scores), 
the Mini-Mental State Examination, the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale - 
Cognitive Subscale, the Functional Activities Questionnaire, the Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment, and the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test. Also included 
were the imaging variable fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography and 
the following magnetic resonance imaging volumetrics: entorhinal, fusiform, 
hippocampal, intra-cranial, mid-temporal, ventricular, and whole brain.
RESULTS: Applying item response theory approaches in this longitudinal setting 
showed clinical assessments informing a common disease scale in the following 
order (from early disease to late disease): Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test, 
Functional Activities Questionnaire, Montreal Cognitive Assessment, Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale - Cognitive Subscale 12, Clinical Dementia Rating - Sum 
of Boxes, and Mini-Mental State Examination. The Clinical Dementia Rating 
communication and home-and-hobbies items were most informative at earlier 
disease stages, while memory, orientation, and personal care informed the 
disease status at later stages. A clinical trial simulation model was developed 
and accurately described within-sample longitudinal distribution of endpoints. 
Simplifying the model to use only baseline age, MMSE, and APOEε4 status as 
predictors, out-of-sample mean progression of ADAS-Cog and CDR Sum of Boxes in 
the ABBY and BLAZE placebo arms was accurately described; however, the 
variability in these endpoints was underpredicted and suggests possibility for 
further model refinement when extrapolating from the ADNI sample to trial data. 
Clinical trial simulations were performed to exemplify use of the model to 
investigate hypothetical disease modification effects on the multivariate, 
longitudinal progression on the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale - Cognitive 
Subscale and the Clinical Dementia Rating - Sum of Boxes.
CONCLUSIONS: The latent variable structure of item response theory can be 
extended to capture a variety of scales that are common assessments and 
indicators of disease status in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease. These 
models are not intended to support causal inferences, but they do successfully 
characterize the observed correlation between endpoints over time and result in 
concise numerical indices of disease status that reflect the totality of 
evidence from considering the endpoints jointly. As such, the models have 
utility for a variety of tasks in clinical trial design, including simulation of 
hypothetical drug effects, interpolation of missing data, and assessment of 
in-sample information.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2023.13
PMID: 36946448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DGP and JAR are employees of the Metrum Research 
group. MJD was an employee of Genentech, Inc., a member of the Roche Group, at 
the time of this work; he is now an employee of Roche Products Pty Limited, 
Sydney, Australia, and owns stock or stock options in F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. 
LAH and JYJ are employees of Genentech and own stock in F. Hoffmann-La Roche 
Ltd. AQ was an employee of Genentech, Inc. and owned stock in Roche Holding Ltd 
at the time of this study; she is now an employee of AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, 
Sweden.


25. Sci Rep. 2021 Feb 5;11(1):3254. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-74399-w.

Multimodal deep learning models for early detection of Alzheimer's disease 
stage.

Venugopalan J(1), Tong L(1), Hassanzadeh HR(2), Wang MD(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and 
Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)School of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and 
Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. maywang@gatech.edu.
(4)School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. maywang@gatech.edu.
(5)Winship Cancer Institute, Parker H. Petit Institute for Bioengineering and 
Biosciences, Institute of People and Technology, Georgia Institute of Technology 
and Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. maywang@gatech.edu.

Most current Alzheimer's disease (AD) and mild cognitive disorders (MCI) studies 
use single data modality to make predictions such as AD stages. The fusion of 
multiple data modalities can provide a holistic view of AD staging analysis. 
Thus, we use deep learning (DL) to integrally analyze imaging (magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI)), genetic (single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)), and 
clinical test data to classify patients into AD, MCI, and controls (CN). We use 
stacked denoising auto-encoders to extract features from clinical and genetic 
data, and use 3D-convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for imaging data. We also 
develop a novel data interpretation method to identify top-performing features 
learned by the deep-models with clustering and perturbation analysis. Using 
Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative (ADNI) dataset, we demonstrate that 
deep models outperform shallow models, including support vector machines, 
decision trees, random forests, and k-nearest neighbors. In addition, we 
demonstrate that integrating multi-modality data outperforms single modality 
models in terms of accuracy, precision, recall, and meanF1 scores. Our models 
have identified hippocampus, amygdala brain areas, and the Rey Auditory Verbal 
Learning Test (RAVLT) as top distinguished features, which are consistent with 
the known AD literature.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-74399-w
PMCID: PMC7864942
PMID: 33547343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


26. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2024 Jul;30(7):e14860. doi: 10.1111/cns.14860.

Amyloid-β but not tau accumulation is strongly associated with longitudinal 
cognitive decline.

Wang W(1), Huang J(2), Qian S(2), Zheng Y(2), Yu X(3), Jiang T(2), Ai R(4), Hou 
J(2), Ma E(5), Cai J(2), He H(2), Wang X(2), Xie C(2)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)The Center of Traditional Chinese Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital, 
Yuying Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical 
University, Wenzhou, China.
(3)Alberta Institute, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Molecular Biology, Akershus University Hospital, 
University of Oslo, Lørenskog, Norway.
(5)Department of Neurology, Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine Hospital of 
Wenzhou, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(6)Oujiang Laboratory, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(7)Key Laboratory of Alzheimer's Disease of Zhejiang Province, Institute of 
Aging, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(8)Department of Geriatrics, Geriatric Medical Center, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.

OBJECTIVE: Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology is featured by the extracellular 
accumulation of amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques and intracellular tau neurofibrillary 
tangles in the brain. We studied whether Aβ and tau accumulation are 
independently associated with future cognitive decline in the AD continuum.
METHODS: Data were acquired from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) public database. A total of 1272 participants were selected based on the 
availability of Aβ-PET and CSF tau at baseline and of those 777 participants 
with follow-up visits.
RESULTS: We found that Aβ-PET and CSF tau pathology were related to cognitive 
decline across the AD clinical spectrum, both as potential predictors for 
dementia progression. Among them, Aβ-PET (A + T- subjects) is an independent 
reliable predictor of longitudinal cognitive decline in terms of ADAS-13, 
ADNI-MEM, and MMSE scores rather than tau pathology (A - T+ subjects), 
indicating tau accumulation is not closely correlated with future cognitive 
impairment without being driven by Aβ deposition. Of note, a high percentage of 
APOE ε4 carriers with Aβ pathology (A+) develop poor memory and learning 
capacity. Interestingly, this condition is not recurrence in terms of the 
ADNI-MEM domain when adding APOE ε4 status. Finally, the levels of Aβ-PET SUVR 
related to glucose hypometabolism more strongly in subjects with A + T- than 
A - T+ both happen at baseline and longitudinal changes.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, Aβ-PET alone without tau pathology (A + T-) measure 
is an independent reliable predictor of longitudinal cognitive decline but may 
nonetheless forecast different status of dementia progression. However, tau 
accumulation alone without Aβ pathology background (A - T+) was not enough to be 
an independent predictor of cognitive worsening.

© 2024 The Author(s). CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cns.14860
PMCID: PMC11251873
PMID: 39014268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no disclosures relevant to 
the manuscript.


27. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2022 Jul;2022:979-985. doi: 
10.1109/EMBC48229.2022.9870882.

Spatio-temporal Tensor Multi-Task Learning for Predicting Alzheimer's Disease in 
a Longitudinal study.

Zhang Y, Zhou M, Liu T, Lanfranchi V, Yang P.

The utilisation of machine learning techniques to predict Alzheimer's Disease 
(AD) progression will substantially assist researchers and clinicians in 
establishing effective AD prevention and treatment strategies. In this research, 
we present a novel Multi-Task Learning (MTL) model for modelling AD progression 
based on tensor formation from spatio-temporal similarity measures of brain 
biomarkers. In this model, each patient sample's prediction in the tensor is 
assigned to a task, with each task sharing a set of latent factors acquired via 
tensor decomposition. To further improve the performance of the model, we 
present a novel regularisation term which utilises the convex combination of 
disease progression to modify longitudinal stability and ensure that two 
regression models have a minimal variation at successive time points. The model 
can be utilised to effectively predict AD progression with magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) data and cognitive scores of AD patients at various stages. We 
conducted extensive experiments to evaluate the performance for the proposed 
model and algorithm utilising data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI). Compared to single-task and state-of-the-art multi-task 
regression techniques, our proposed method has greater accuracy and stability 
for predicting AD progress in terms of root mean square error, with an average 
reduction of 2.60 compared to single-task regression methods and 1.17 compared 
to multi-task regression methods in the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
questionnaire; with an average reduction of 5.08 compared to single-task 
regression methods and 2.71 compared to multi-task regression methods in the 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog).

DOI: 10.1109/EMBC48229.2022.9870882
PMID: 36086566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Feb 10:2023.02.07.23285572. doi: 
10.1101/2023.02.07.23285572.

Heterogeneity in Preclinical Alzheimer's Disease Trial Cohort Identified by 
Image-based Data-Driven Disease Progression Modelling.

Shand C(1), Markiewicz PJ(2), Cash DM(3), Alexander DC(1), Donohue MC(4), 
Barkhof F(2)(5), Oxtoby NP(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Medical Image Computing, Department of Computer Science, 
University College London, London, UK.
(2)Centre for Medical Image Computing, Department of Medical Physics and 
Biomedical Engineering, University College London, London, UK.
(3)Dementia Research Centre, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University 
College London, London, UK.
(4)Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, San Diego, USA.
(5)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, VU University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands.

IMPORTANCE: Undetected biological heterogeneity adversely impacts trials in 
Alzheimer's disease because rate of cognitive decline - and perhaps response to 
treatment - differs in subgroups. Recent results show that data-driven 
approaches can unravel the heterogeneity of Alzheimer's disease progression. The 
resulting stratification is yet to be leveraged in clinical trials.
OBJECTIVE: Investigate whether image-based data-driven disease progression 
modelling could identify baseline biological heterogeneity in a clinical trial, 
and whether these subgroups have prognostic or predictive value.
DESIGN: Screening data from the Anti-Amyloid Treatment in Asymptomatic Alzheimer 
Disease (A4) Study collected between April 2014 and December 2017, and 
longitudinal data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
observational study downloaded in February 2022 were used.
SETTING: The A4 Study is an interventional trial involving 67 sites in the US, 
Canada, Australia, and Japan. ADNI is a multi-center observational study in 
North America.
PARTICIPANTS: Cognitively unimpaired amyloid-positive participants with a 
3-Tesla T1-weighted MRI scan. Amyloid positivity was determined using 
florbetapir PET imaging (in A4) and CSF Aβ(1-42) (in ADNI).
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Regional volumes estimated from MRI scans were used 
as input to the Subtype and Stage Inference (SuStaIn) algorithm. Outcomes 
included cognitive test scores and SUVr values from florbetapir and flortaucipir 
PET.
RESULTS: We included 1,240 Aβ+ participants (and 407 Aβ- controls) from the A4 
Study, and 731 A4-eligible ADNI participants. SuStaIn identified three 
neurodegeneration subtypes - Typical, Cortical, Subcortical - comprising 523 
(42%) individuals. The remainder are designated subtype zero (insufficient 
atrophy). Baseline PACC scores (A4 primary outcome) were significantly worse in 
the Cortical subtype (median = -1.27, IQR=[-3.34,0.83]) relative to both subtype 
zero (median=-0.013, IQR=[-1.85,1.67], P<.0001) and the Subcortical subtype 
(median=0.03, IQR=[-1.78,1.61], P=.0006). In ADNI, over a four-year period 
(comparable to A4), greater cognitive decline in the mPACC was observed in both 
the Typical (-0.23/yr; 95% CI, [-0.41,-0.05]; P=.01) and Cortical (-0.24/yr; 
[-0.42,-0.06]; P=.009) subtypes, as well as the CDR-SB (Typical: +0.09/yr, 
[0.06,0.12], P<.0001; and Cortical: +0.07/yr, [0.04,0.10], P<.0001).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In a large secondary prevention trial, our 
image-based model detected neurodegenerative heterogeneity predictive of 
cognitive heterogeneity. We argue that such a model is a valuable tool to be 
considered in future trial design to control for previously undetected variance.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.02.07.23285572
PMCID: PMC9934776
PMID: 36798314


29. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2021 Sep;208:106282. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106282. Epub 2021 Jul 22.

Early Alzheimer's disease diagnosis with the contrastive loss using paired 
structural MRIs.

Qiao H(1), Chen L(2), Ye Z(3), Zhu F(4).

Author information:
(1)Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Chongqing 400714, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
BeiJing 100049, China. Electronic address: qiaohezhe@cigit.ac.cn.
(2)Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Chongqing 400714, China. Electronic address: chenlin@cigit.ac.cn.
(3)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, United States of America. 
Electronic address: zye16@jh.edu.
(4)Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Chongqing 400714, China. Electronic address: zhufan@cigit.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is a chronic and fatal 
neurodegenerative disease with progressive impairment of memory. Brain 
structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) has been widely applied as 
important biomarkers of AD. Various machine learning approaches, especially deep 
learning-based models, have been proposed for the early diagnosis of AD and 
monitoring the disease progression on sMRI data. However, the requirement for a 
large number of training images still hinders the extensive usage of AD 
diagnosis. In addition, due to the similarities in human whole-brain structure, 
finding the subtle brain changes is essential to extract discriminative features 
from limited sMRI data effectively.
METHODS: In this work, we proposed two types of contrastive losses with paired 
sMRIs to promote the diagnostic performance using group categories (G-CAT) and 
varying subject mini-mental state examination (S-MMSE) information, 
respectively. Specifically, G-CAT contrastive loss layer was used to learn the 
closer feature representation from sMRIs with the same categories, while ranking 
information from S-MMSE assists the model to explore subtle changes between 
individuals.
RESULTS: The model was trained on ADNI-1. Comparison with baseline methods was 
performed on MIRIAD and ADNI-2. For the classification task on MIRIAD, S-MMSE 
achieves 93.5% of accuracy, 96.6% of sensitivity, and 94.9% of specificity, 
respectively. G-CAT and S-MMSE both reach remarkable performance in terms of 
classification sensitivity and specificity respectively. Comparing with 
state-of-the-art methods, we found this proposed method could achieve comparable 
results with other approaches.
CONCLUSION: The proposed model could extract discriminative features under 
whole-brain similarity. Extensive experiments also support the accuracy of this 
model, i.e., it provides better ability to identify uncertain samples, 
especially for the classification task of subjects with MMSE in 22-27. Source 
code is freely available at https://github.com/fengduqianhe/ADComparative.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106282
PMID: 34343744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest All authors 
declared no conflict of interests.


30. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Apr 7;14:840386. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.840386. 
eCollection 2022.

Prediction Models for Conversion From Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer's 
Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Chen Y(1), Qian X(2), Zhang Y(1), Su W(1), Huang Y(1), Wang X(1), Chen X(1), 
Zhao E(1), Han L(1)(3), Ma Y(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Evidence-Based Nursing, School of Nursing, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 
China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Second Hospital of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 
China.
(3)Department of Nursing, Gansu Provincial Hospital, Lanzhou, China.
(4)First School of Clinical Medicine, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a devastating 
neurodegenerative disorder with no cure, and available treatments are only able 
to postpone the progression of the disease. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is 
considered to be a transitional stage preceding AD. Therefore, prediction models 
for conversion from MCI to AD are desperately required. These will allow early 
treatment of patients with MCI before they develop AD. This study performed a 
systematic review and meta-analysis to summarize the reported risk prediction 
models and identify the most prevalent factors for conversion from MCI to AD.
METHODS: We systematically reviewed the studies from the databases of PubMed, 
CINAHL Plus, Web of Science, Embase, and Cochrane Library, which were searched 
through September 2021. Two reviewers independently identified eligible articles 
and extracted the data. We used the Critical Appraisal and Data Extraction for 
Systematic Reviews of Prediction Modeling Studies (CHARMS) checklist for the 
risk of bias assessment.
RESULTS: In total, 18 articles describing the prediction models for conversion 
from MCI to AD were identified. The dementia conversion rate of elderly patients 
with MCI ranged from 14.49 to 87%. Models in 12 studies were developed using the 
data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). C-index/area 
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of development models 
were 0.67-0.98, and the validation models were 0.62-0.96. MRI, apolipoprotein E 
genotype 4 (APOE4), older age, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score, and 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale cognitive (ADAS-cog) score were the most 
common and strongest predictors included in the models.
CONCLUSION: In this systematic review, many prediction models have been 
developed and have good predictive performance, but the lack of external 
validation of models limited the extensive application in the general 
population. In clinical practice, it is recommended that medical professionals 
adopt a comprehensive forecasting method rather than a single predictive factor 
to screen patients with a high risk of MCI. Future research should pay attention 
to the improvement, calibration, and validation of existing models while 
considering new variables, new methods, and differences in risk profiles across 
populations.

Copyright © 2022 Chen, Qian, Zhang, Su, Huang, Wang, Chen, Zhao, Han and Ma.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.840386
PMCID: PMC9049273
PMID: 35493941

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


31. Front Psychiatry. 2020 Jan 14;10:953. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00953. eCollection 
2019.

A Biomarker for Alzheimer's Disease Based on Patterns of Regional Brain Atrophy.

Frenzel S(1), Wittfeld K(1)(2), Habes M(3), Klinger-König J(1), Bülow R(4), 
Völzke H(5), Grabe HJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medicine Greifswald, 
Greifswald, Germany.
(2)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Greifswald, Germany.
(3)Center for Biomedical Image Computing and Analytics, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(4)Institute of Diagnostic Radiology and Neuroradiology, University Medicine 
Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
(5)Institute for Community Medicine, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, 
Germany.

Introduction: It has been shown that Alzheimer's disease (AD) is accompanied by 
marked structural brain changes that can be detected several years before 
clinical diagnosis via structural magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. In this 
study, we developed a structural MR-based biomarker for in vivo detection of AD 
using a supervised machine learning approach. Based on an individual's pattern 
of brain atrophy a continuous AD score is assigned which measures the similarity 
with brain atrophy patterns seen in clinical cases of AD. Methods: The 
underlying statistical model was trained with MR scans of patients and healthy 
controls from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI-1 
screening). Validation was performed within ADNI-1 and in an independent patient 
sample from the Open Access Series of Imaging Studies (OASIS-1). In addition, 
our analyses included data from a large general population sample of the Study 
of Health in Pomerania (SHIP-Trend). Results: Based on the proposed AD score we 
were able to differentiate patients from healthy controls in ADNI-1 and OASIS-1 
with an accuracy of 89% (AUC = 95%) and 87% (AUC = 93%), respectively. Moreover, 
we found the AD score to be significantly associated with cognitive functioning 
as assessed by the Mini-Mental State Examination in the OASIS-1 sample after 
correcting for diagnosis, age, sex, age·sex, and total intracranial volume 
(Cohen's f2 = 0.13). Additional analyses showed that the prediction accuracy of 
AD status based on both the AD score and the MMSE score is significantly higher 
than when using just one of them. In SHIP-Trend we found the AD score to be 
weakly but significantly associated with a test of verbal memory consisting of 
an immediate and a delayed word list recall (again after correcting for age, 
sex, age·sex, and total intracranial volume, Cohen's f2 = 0.009). This 
association was mainly driven by the immediate recall performance. Discussion: 
In summary, our proposed biomarker well differentiated between patients and 
healthy controls in an independent test sample. It was associated with measures 
of cognitive functioning both in a patient sample and a general population 
sample. Our approach might be useful for defining robust MR-based biomarkers for 
other neurodegenerative diseases, too.

Copyright © 2020 Frenzel, Wittfeld, Habes, Klinger-König, Bülow, Völzke and 
Grabe.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00953
PMCID: PMC6970941
PMID: 31992998


32. Exp Brain Res. 2021 Sep;239(9):2925-2937. doi: 10.1007/s00221-021-06182-w. Epub 
2021 Jul 27.

Harnessing forgetfulness: can episodic-memory tests predict early Alzheimer's 
disease?

Warren SL(1), Moustafa AA(2)(3), Alashwal H(4); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia. 
19466949@student.westernsydney.edu.au.
(2)School of Psychology, Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia.
(3)MARCS Institute for Brain and Behaviour, Western Sydney University, Sydney, 
Australia.
(4)College of Information Technology, United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, 
15551, United Arab Emirates.

A rapid increase in the number of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) is 
expected over the next decades. Accordingly, there is a critical need for 
early-stage AD detection methods that can enable effective treatment strategies. 
In this study, we consider the ability of episodic-memory measures to predict 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to AD conversion and thus, detect early-stage 
AD. For our analysis, we studied 307 participants with MCI across four years 
using data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Using a 
binary logistic regression, we compared episodic-memory tests to each other and 
to prominent neuroimaging methods in MCI converter (MCI participants who 
developed AD) and MCI non-converter groups (MCI participants who did not develop 
AD). We also combined variables to test the accuracy of mixed-predictor models. 
Our results indicated that the best predictors of MCI to AD conversion were the 
following: a combined episodic-memory and neuroimaging model in year one 
(59.8%), the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test in year two (71.7%), a mixed 
episodic-memory predictor model in year three (77.7%) and the Logical Memory 
Test in year four (77.2%) of ADNI. Overall, we found that individual 
episodic-memory measure and mixed models performed similarly when predicting MCI 
to AD conversion. Comparatively, individual neuroimaging measures predicted MCI 
conversion worse than chance. Accordingly, our results indicate that 
episodic-memory tests could be instrumental in detecting early-stage AD and 
enabling effective treatment.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-021-06182-w
PMID: 34313791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Ann Nucl Med. 2021 Aug;35(8):889-899. doi: 10.1007/s12149-021-01626-3. Epub 2021 
Jun 2.

Detection of Alzheimer's disease using ECD SPECT images by transfer learning 
from FDG PET.

Ni YC(1)(2), Tseng FP(3), Pai MC(4)(5), Hsiao IT(6)(7), Lin KJ(6)(7), Lin ZK(3), 
Lin WB(3), Chiu PY(8), Hung GU(9), Chang CC(10), Chang YT(11), Chuang KS(12); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Health Physics Division, Institute of Nuclear Energy Research, Atomic Energy 
Council, 1000 Wenhua Rd. Jiaan Village, Longtan District, Taoyuan City, 325, 
Taiwan. janet@iner.gov.tw.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering and Environmental Sciences, National 
Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. janet@iner.gov.tw.
(3)Health Physics Division, Institute of Nuclear Energy Research, Atomic Energy 
Council, 1000 Wenhua Rd. Jiaan Village, Longtan District, Taoyuan City, 325, 
Taiwan.
(4)Division of Behavioral Neurology, Department of Neurology, National Cheng 
Kung University Hospital, College of Medicine and Institute of Gerontology, 
National Cheng Kung University, 138, Sheng Li Road, North District, Tainan, 704, 
Taiwan. pair@mail.ncku.edu.tw.
(5)Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, 
Tainan, Taiwan. pair@mail.ncku.edu.tw.
(6)Department of Medical Imaging and Radiological Sciences & Healthy Aging 
Center, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging Center, Linkou Chang 
Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Neurology, Show Chwan Memorial Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Chang Bing Show Chwan Memorial Hospital, 
Changhua, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Neurology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.
(11)Department of Neurology, Institute of Translational Research in Biomedicine, 
Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University College of 
Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(12)Department of Biomedical Engineering and Environmental Sciences, National 
Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: To develop a practical method to rapidly utilize a deep learning 
model to automatically extract image features based on a small number of SPECT 
brain perfusion images in general clinics to objectively evaluate Alzheimer's 
disease (AD).
METHODS: For the properties of low cost and convenient access in general 
clinics, Tc-99-ECD SPECT imaging data in brain perfusion detection was used in 
this study for AD detection. Two-stage transfer learning based on the Inception 
v3 network model was performed using the ImageNet dataset and ADNI database. To 
improve training accuracy, the three-dimensional image was reorganized into 
three sets of two-dimensional images for data augmentation and ensemble 
learning. The effect of pre-training parameters for Tc-99m-ECD SPECT image to 
distinguish AD from normal cognition (NC) was investigated, as well as the 
effect of the sample size of F-18-FDG PET images used in pre-training. The same 
model was also fine-tuned for the prediction of the MMSE score from the 
Tc-99m-ECD SPECT image.
RESULTS: The AUC values of w/wo pre-training parameters for Tc-99m-ECD SPECT 
image to distinguish AD from NC were 0.86 and 0.90. The sensitivity, 
specificity, precision, accuracy, and F1 score were 100%, 75%, 76%, 86%, and 
86%, respectively for the training model with 1000 cases of F-18-FDG PET image 
for pre-training. The AUC values for various sample sizes of the training 
dataset (100, 200, 400, 800, 1000 cases) for pre-training were 0.86, 0.91, 0.95, 
0.97, and 0.97. Regardless of the pre-training condition ECD dataset used, the 
AUC value was greater than 0.85. Finally, predicting cognitive scores and MMSE 
scores correlated (R2 = 0.7072).
CONCLUSIONS: With the ADNI pre-trained model, the sensitivity and accuracy of 
the proposed deep learning model using SPECT ECD perfusion images to 
differentiate AD from NC were increased by approximately 30% and 10%, 
respectively. Our study indicated that the model trained on PET FDG metabolic 
imaging for the same disease could be transferred to a small sample of SPECT 
cerebral perfusion images. This model will contribute to the practicality of 
SPECT cerebral perfusion images using deep learning technology to objectively 
recognize AD.

© 2021. The Japanese Society of Nuclear Medicine.

DOI: 10.1007/s12149-021-01626-3
PMID: 34076857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Alzheimers Dement. 2018 May;14(5):623-633. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2017.11.006. Epub 
2017 Dec 20.

Genome-wide association study of Alzheimer's disease endophenotypes at 
prediagnosis stages.

Chung J(1), Wang X(2), Maruyama T(3), Ma Y(4), Zhang X(4), Mez J(5), Sherva 
R(4), Takeyama H(6); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; Lunetta KL(7), 
Farrer LA(8), Jun GR(9).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Graduate Program, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA; 
Department of Medicine (Biomedical Genetics), Boston University, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(2)Neurogenetics and Integrated Genomics, Andover Innovative Medicines (AiM) 
Institute, Eisai Inc, Andover, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Life Science & Medical Bioscience, Waseda University, Tokyo, 
Japan; Computational Bio-Big Data Open Innovation Lab, National Institute of 
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Medicine (Biomedical Genetics), Boston University, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Life Science & Medical Bioscience, Waseda University, Tokyo, 
Japan; Computational Bio-Big Data Open Innovation Lab, National Institute of 
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo, Japan; Research Organization 
for Nano & Life Innovation, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Bioinformatics Graduate Program, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA; 
Department of Medicine (Biomedical Genetics), Boston University, Boston, MA, 
USA; Department of Neurology, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA; Department of 
Biostatistics, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA; Department of Ophthalmology, 
Boston University, Boston, MA, USA; Department of Epidemiology, Boston 
University, Boston, MA, USA.
(9)Department of Medicine (Biomedical Genetics), Boston University, Boston, MA, 
USA; Neurogenetics and Integrated Genomics, Andover Innovative Medicines (AiM) 
Institute, Eisai Inc, Andover, MA, USA. Electronic address: 
gyungah_jun@eisai.com.

INTRODUCTION: Genetic associations for endophenotypes of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) in cognitive stages preceding AD have not been thoroughly evaluated.
METHODS: We conducted genome-wide association studies for AD-related 
endophenotypes including hippocampal volume, logical memory scores, and 
cerebrospinal fluid Aβ42 and total/phosphorylated tau in cognitively normal 
(CN), mild cognitive impairment, and AD dementia subjects from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative study.
RESULTS: In CN subjects, study-wide significant (P < 8.3 × 10-9) loci were 
identified for total tau near SRRM4 and C14orf79 and for hippocampal volume near 
MTUS1. In mild cognitive impairment subjects, study-wide significant association 
was found with single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) near ZNF804B for logical 
memory test of delayed recall scores. We found consistent expression patterns of 
C14orf40 and MTUS1 in carriers with risk alleles of expression SNPs and in 
brains of AD patients, compared with in the noncarriers and in brains of 
controls.
DISCUSSION: Our findings for AD-related brain changes before AD provide insight 
about early AD-related biological processes.

Copyright © 2017 the Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2017.11.006
PMCID: PMC5938137
PMID: 29274321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Neurology. 2023 Jan 17;100(3):e275-e285. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000201417. Epub 
2022 Oct 3.

Association of CSF GAP-43 With the Rate of Cognitive Decline and Progression to 
Dementia in Amyloid-Positive Individuals.

Öhrfelt A(1), Benedet AL(2), Ashton NJ(2), Kvartsberg H(2), Vandijck M(2), 
Weiner MW(2), Trojanowski JQ(2), Shaw LM(2), Zetterberg H(2), Blennow K(2); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
William Jagust, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin J, Morris J, 
Shaw LM, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies P, Hefti F, Holtzman D, Mesulam MM, 
Potter NW, Snyder P, Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, Rafii M, Chow T, 
Raman R, Jimenez G, Donohue M, Ssert D, Harless K, Salazar J, Cabrera Y, Walter 
S, Hergesheimer L, Beckett L, Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Matthew 
Bernstein, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem 
M, Vemuri P, Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman 
EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Morris JC, Cairns NJ, Franklin E, 
Taylor-Reinwald L, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga 
AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, 
Nho K, Weiner MW, Thal L, Khachaturian Z, Weiner MW, Snyder PJ, Potter W, Paul 
S, Albert M, Frank R, Hsiao J, Silbert LC, Lind B, Crissey R, Kaye JA, Raina 
Carter A, Dolen S, Quinn J, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Becerra M, Teodoro L, 
Dagerman K, Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Fleisher A, Ziolkowski J, 
Heidebrink JL, Zbizek-Nulph L, Lord JL, Clinic M, Petersen R, Mason SS, Albers 
CS, Knopman D, Johnson K, Villanueva-Meyer J, Pavlik V, Pacini N, Lamb A, Kass 
JS, Doody RS, Shibley V, Chowdhury M, Rountree S, Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, 
Mintz A, Ances B, Morris JC, Winkfield D, Carroll M, Stobbs-Cucchi G, Oliver A, 
Creech ML, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Geldmacher D, Natelson Love M, Griffith R, 
Clark D, Brockington J, Marson D, Sinai M, Grossman H, Goldstein MA, Greenberg 
J, Mitsis E, Shah RC, Lamar M, Samuels P, Duara R, Greig-Custo MT, Rodriguez R, 
Albert M, Onyike C, D'Agostino D 2nd, Kielb S, Smith A, Raj BA, Fargher K, 
Sadowski M, Wisniewski T, Shulman M, Faustin A, Rao J, Ulysse A, Chen S, Sheikh 
MO, Doraiswamy PM, Petrella JR, James O, Wong TZ, Borges-Neto S, Karlawish JH, 
Wolk DA, Vaishnavi S, Clark CM, Arnold SE, Smith CD, Jicha GA, El Khouli R, 
Raslau FD, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Martin K, Kowalksi 
N, Keltz M, Goldstein BS, Makino KM, Saleem Ismail M, Thai G, Pierce A, Yanez B, 
Sosa E, Witbracht M, Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, Hajjar I, 
Cellar JS, Burns JM, Swerdlow RH, Brooks WM, Silverman DHS, Kremen S, Apostolova 
L, Tingus K, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, Woo E, Teng E, Graff-Radford NR, Poki-Walker K, 
Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews BR, Brosch JR, Herring S, van Dyck CH, Mecca AP, 
Good SP, MacAvoy MG, Carson RE, Varma P, Chertkow H, Vaitekunis S, Hosein C, 
Black S, Stefanovic B, Heyn CC, Robin Hsiung GY, Sossi V, Feldman H, Assaly M, 
Finger E, Pasternak S, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, Drost D, Mesulam MM, 
Rogalski E, Lipowski K, Weintraub S, Bonakdarpour B, Grant I, Robson J, Kerwin 
D, Wu CK, Johnson N, Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Perry 
D, Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, MCCann K, Poe J, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, 
Marshall GA, Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Chao S, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, 
Zamrini E, Belden CM, Clark KA, Killiany R, Stern R, Mez J, Kowall N, Budson AE, 
Obisesan TO, Ntekim OE, Wolday S, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Tatsuoka C, Fatica P, 
Fletcher E, Maillard P, Olichney J, DeCarli C, Carmichael O, Bates V, Capote H, 
Rainka M, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Perrin 
A, Hetelle J, Burke A, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Tarawneh R, Kelley B, Zimmerman EA, 
Celmins D, Hart D, Miller DD, Smith KE, Koleva H, Nam KW, Shim H, Schultz SK, 
Williamson JD, Craft S, Yang M, Sink KM, Ott BR, Tremont G, Daiello LA, Drake 
JD, Bernick C, Munic D, Mintz A, O'Connelll A, Wiliams A, Masdeu J, Shi J, 
Garcia A, Sabbagh M, Newhouse P, Potkin S, Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, 
Kittur S, Pearlson GD, Anderson K, Lee A, Flashman LA, Seltzer M, Hynes ML, 
Santulli RB, Relkin N, Chiang G, Lin M, Ravdin L, Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, 
Aisen P, Petersen R, Green RC, Harvey D, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Morris JC, Saykin 
AJ, Shaw LM, Toga AW, Trojanowki JQ, Neylan T, Grafman J, Green RC, Montine T, 
Weiner M, Petersen R, Aisen P, Jimenez G, Donohue M, Gessert D, Harless K, 
Salazar J, Cabrera Y, Walter S, Hergesheimen L, Neylan T, Hayes J, Finley S, 
Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, 
Kantarci K, Ward C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Landau S, Morris 
JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka PM, 
Figurski M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, 
Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Becerra M, Teodoro 
L, Dagerman K, Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Fleisher A, Stern Y, Honig LS, 
Mintz A, Fleischman D, Arfanakis K, Shah RC, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, 
Doraiswamy PM, Petrella JR, James O, Borges-Neto S, Wong TZ, Porsteinsson AP, 
Goldstein B, Martin KS, Thai G, Pierce A, Yanez B, Sosa E, Witbracht M, Sadowsky 
C, Martinez W, Villena T, Rosen H, Perry D, Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, 
MCCann K, Poe J, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall G, Zamrini E, Belden CM, 
Clark KA, Obisesan TO, Ntekim OE, Wolday S, Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, 
Peskind ER, Petrie EC, Li G, Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Chao S, Lane B, Rosen A, 
Tinklenberg J, Lin M, Chiang G, Ravdin L, Relkin N, O'Connelll A, Wiliams A, 
Mackin S, Aisen P, Raman R, Mackin S, Weiner M, Aisen P, Jack CR Jr, Landau S, 
Saykin AJ, Toga AW, DeCarli C, Koeppe RA, Green RC, Drake E, Aisen P, Raman R, 
Donohue M, Rafii M, Chow T, Raman R, Jimenez G, Donohue M, Gessert D, Harless K, 
Salazar J, Cabrera Y, Walter S, Hergesheimer L, Mackin S, Nelson C, Bickford D, 
Butters M, Zmuda M, Jack CR Jr, Matthew Bernstein, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem 
M, Kantarci K, Ward C, Reyes D, Koeppe RA, Landau S, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, 
Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Faber KM, Nho K, Mackin S, Rosen H, Nelson C, Bickford D, 
Au YH, Scherer K, Catalinotto D, Stark S, Ong E, Fernandez D, Butters M, Zmuda 
M, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry (A.Ö., A.L.B., N.J.A., 
H.K., H.Z., K.B.), Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, The Sahlgrenska 
Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Mölndal; Wallenberg Centre for 
Molecular and Translational Medicine (N.J.A.), University of Gothenburg, Sweden; 
Department of Old Age Psychiatry (N.J.A.), Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology 
and Neuroscience, King's College London; NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for 
Mental Health and Biomedical Research Unit for Dementia at South London and 
Maudsley NHS Foundation (N.J.A., H.Z.), London, United Kingdom; Clinical 
Neurochemistry Laboratory (H.K., K.B.), Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
Mölndal, Sweden; Fujirebio Europe NV (M.V.), Ghent, Belgium; Department of 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center (M.W.W.), Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA; Departments of Radiology 
(M.W.W.), Medicine (M.W.W.), Psychiatry (M.W.W.) and Neurology (M.W.W.), 
University of California, San Francisco; Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine (J.Q.T., L.M.S.), Institute on Aging, Center for Neurodegenerative 
Disease Research, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia; 
Department of Neurodegenerative Disease (H.Z.), UCL Institute of Neurology, 
London, United Kingdom; UK Dementia Research Institute (H.Z.), London; and Hong 
Kong Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (H.Z.), China. 
annika.ohrfelt@neuro.gu.se.
(2)From the Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry (A.Ö., A.L.B., N.J.A., 
H.K., H.Z., K.B.), Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, The Sahlgrenska 
Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Mölndal; Wallenberg Centre for 
Molecular and Translational Medicine (N.J.A.), University of Gothenburg, Sweden; 
Department of Old Age Psychiatry (N.J.A.), Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology 
and Neuroscience, King's College London; NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for 
Mental Health and Biomedical Research Unit for Dementia at South London and 
Maudsley NHS Foundation (N.J.A., H.Z.), London, United Kingdom; Clinical 
Neurochemistry Laboratory (H.K., K.B.), Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
Mölndal, Sweden; Fujirebio Europe NV (M.V.), Ghent, Belgium; Department of 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center (M.W.W.), Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA; Departments of Radiology 
(M.W.W.), Medicine (M.W.W.), Psychiatry (M.W.W.) and Neurology (M.W.W.), 
University of California, San Francisco; Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine (J.Q.T., L.M.S.), Institute on Aging, Center for Neurodegenerative 
Disease Research, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia; 
Department of Neurodegenerative Disease (H.Z.), UCL Institute of Neurology, 
London, United Kingdom; UK Dementia Research Institute (H.Z.), London; and Hong 
Kong Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (H.Z.), China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: To test the associations between the presynaptic 
growth-associated protein 43 (GAP-43), quantified in CSF, and biomarkers of 
Alzheimer disease (AD) pathophysiology, cross-sectionally and longitudinally.
METHODS: In this retrospective study, GAP-43 was measured in participants from 
the AD Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort using an in-house ELISA method, and 
levels were compared between groups, both cross-sectionally and longitudinally. 
Linear regression models tested the associations between biomarkers of AD 
(amyloid beta [Aβ] and tau pathologies, neurodegeneration, and cognition) 
adjusted by age, sex, and diagnosis. Linear mixed-effect models evaluated how 
baseline GAP-43 predicts brain hypometabolism, atrophy, and cognitive decline 
over time. Cox proportional hazard regression models tested how GAP-43 levels 
and Aβ status, at baseline, increased the risk of progression to AD dementia 
over time.
RESULTS: This study included 786 participants from the ADNI cohort, which were 
further classified in cognitively unimpaired (CU) Aβ-negative (nCU- = 197); CU 
Aβ-positive (nCU+ = 55), mild cognitively impaired (MCI) Aβ-negative (nMCI- = 
228), MCI Aβ-positive (nMCI+ = 193), and AD dementia Aβ-positive (nAD = 113). 
CSF GAP-43 levels were increased in Aβ-positive compared with Aβ-negative 
participants, independent of the cognitive status. In Aβ-positive participants, 
high baseline GAP-43 levels led to worse brain metabolic decline (p = 0.01), 
worse brain atrophy (p = 8.8 × 10-27), and worse MMSE scores (p = 0.03) over 
time, as compared with those with low GAP-43 levels. Similarly, Aβ-positive 
participants with high baseline GAP-43 had the highest risk to convert to AD 
dementia (hazard ratio [HR = 8.56, 95% CI 4.94-14.80, p = 1.5 × 10-14]). Despite 
the significant association with Aβ pathology (η2 Aβ PET = 0.09, P Aβ PET < 
0.001), CSF total tau (tTau) and phosphorylated tau (pTau) had a larger effect 
size on GAP43 than Aβ PET (η2 pTau-181 = 0.53, P pTau-181 < 0.001; η2 tTau = 
0.59, P tTau < 0.001).
DISCUSSION: High baseline levels of CSF GAP-43 are associated with progression 
in Aβ-positive individuals, with a more aggressive neurodegenerative process, 
faster rate of cognitive decline, and increased risk of converting to dementia.

© 2022 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000201417
PMCID: PMC9869758
PMID: 36192174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Neuroimaging. 2019 May;29(3):376-382. doi: 10.1111/jon.12598. Epub 2019 Jan 
14.

Semiautomated Assessment of the Anterior Cingulate Cortex in Alzheimer's 
Disease.

Jung F(1), Kazemifar S(2), Bartha R(2), Rajakumar N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Medical Biophysics, Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Anatomy & Cell Biology, Western University, London, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is involved in 
several cognitive processes including executive function. Degenerative changes 
of ACC are consistently seen in Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, volumetric 
changes specific to the ACC in AD are not clear because of the difficulty in 
segmenting this region. The objectives of the current study were to develop a 
precise and high-throughput approach for measuring ACC volumes and to correlate 
the relationship between ACC volume and cognitive function in AD.
METHODS: Structural T1 -weighted magnetic resonance images of AD patients (n = 
47) and age-matched controls (n = 47) at baseline and at 24 months were obtained 
from the Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative (ADNI) database and studied 
using a custom-designed semiautomated segmentation protocol.
RESULTS: ACC volumes obtained using the semiautomated protocol were highly 
correlated to values obtained from manual segmentation (r = .98) and the 
semiautomated protocol was considerably faster. When comparing AD and control 
subjects, no significant differences were observed in baseline ACC volumes or in 
change in ACC volumes over 24 months using the two segmentation methods. 
However, a change in ACC volume over 24 months did not correlate with a change 
in mini-mental state examination scores.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that the proposed semiautomated segmentation 
protocol is reliable for determining ACC volume in neurodegenerative conditions 
including AD.

© 2019 by the American Society of Neuroimaging.

DOI: 10.1111/jon.12598
PMID: 30640412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Neurology. 2022 Sep 27;99(13):e1402-e1413. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200898. 
Epub 2022 Jul 6.

Association of Pace of Aging Measured by Blood-Based DNA Methylation With 
Age-Related Cognitive Impairment and Dementia.

Sugden K(1), Caspi A(2), Elliott ML(2), Bourassa KJ(2), Chamarti K(2), Corcoran 
DL(2), Hariri AR(2), Houts RM(2), Kothari M(2), Kritchevsky S(2), Kuchel GA(2), 
Mill JS(2), Williams BS(2), Belsky DW(2), Moffitt TE(2); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative*.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Psychology and Neuroscience (K.S., A.C., M.L.E., K.C., 
A.R.H., R.M.H., B.S.W., T.E.M.), and Center for Genomic and Computational 
Biology (K.S., A.C., B.S.W., T.E.M.), Duke University, Durham, NC; Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences (A.C., T.E.M.), Duke University School of 
Medicine, Durham, NC; Social, Genetic, and Developmental Psychiatry Centre (A.C, 
T.E.M.), Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology, and Neuroscience, King's College 
London, UK. Center for the Study of Aging and Human Development (K.J.B.), Duke 
University, Durham, NC; Department of Genetics (D.L.C.), University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill; Butler Columbia Aging Center (M.K., 
D.W.B.), Columbia University, New York, New York; Sticht Center for Healthy 
Aging and Alzheimer's Prevention (S.K.), Wake Forest School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC; UConn Center on Aging (G.A.K.), University of Connecticut, 
Farmington, Connecticut, USA; College of Medicine and Health (J.S.M.), 
University of Exeter Medical School, Devon, UK; and Department of Epidemiology 
(D.W.B.), Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, New York, New 
York. karen.sugden@duke.edu.
(2)From the Department of Psychology and Neuroscience (K.S., A.C., M.L.E., K.C., 
A.R.H., R.M.H., B.S.W., T.E.M.), and Center for Genomic and Computational 
Biology (K.S., A.C., B.S.W., T.E.M.), Duke University, Durham, NC; Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences (A.C., T.E.M.), Duke University School of 
Medicine, Durham, NC; Social, Genetic, and Developmental Psychiatry Centre (A.C, 
T.E.M.), Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology, and Neuroscience, King's College 
London, UK. Center for the Study of Aging and Human Development (K.J.B.), Duke 
University, Durham, NC; Department of Genetics (D.L.C.), University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill; Butler Columbia Aging Center (M.K., 
D.W.B.), Columbia University, New York, New York; Sticht Center for Healthy 
Aging and Alzheimer's Prevention (S.K.), Wake Forest School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC; UConn Center on Aging (G.A.K.), University of Connecticut, 
Farmington, Connecticut, USA; College of Medicine and Health (J.S.M.), 
University of Exeter Medical School, Devon, UK; and Department of Epidemiology 
(D.W.B.), Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, New York, New 
York.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: DNA methylation algorithms are increasingly used to 
estimate biological aging; however, how these proposed measures of 
whole-organism biological aging relate to aging in the brain is not known. We 
used data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and the 
Framingham Heart Study (FHS) Offspring Cohort to test the association between 
blood-based DNA methylation measures of biological aging and cognitive 
impairment and dementia in older adults.
METHODS: We tested 3 "generations" of DNA methylation age algorithms (first 
generation: Horvath and Hannum clocks; second generation: PhenoAge and GrimAge; 
and third generation: DunedinPACE, Dunedin Pace of Aging Calculated from the 
Epigenome) against the following measures of cognitive impairment in ADNI: 
clinical diagnosis of dementia and mild cognitive impairment, scores on 
Alzheimer disease (AD) / Alzheimer disease and related dementias (ADRD) 
screening tests (Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale, Mini-Mental State 
Examination, and Montreal Cognitive Assessment), and scores on cognitive tests 
(Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test, Logical Memory test, and Trail Making Test). 
In an independent replication in the FHS Offspring Cohort, we further tested the 
longitudinal association between the DNA methylation algorithms and the risk of 
developing dementia.
RESULTS: In ADNI (N = 649 individuals), the first-generation (Horvath and Hannum 
DNA methylation age clocks) and the second-generation (PhenoAge and GrimAge) DNA 
methylation measures of aging were not consistently associated with measures of 
cognitive impairment in older adults. By contrast, a third-generation measure of 
biological aging, DunedinPACE, was associated with clinical diagnosis of 
Alzheimer disease (beta [95% CI] = 0.28 [0.08-0.47]), poorer scores on Alzheimer 
disease/ADRD screening tests (beta [Robust SE] = -0.10 [0.04] to 0.08[0.04]), 
and cognitive tests (beta [Robust SE] = -0.12 [0.04] to 0.10 [0.03]). The 
association between faster pace of aging, as measured by DunedinPACE, and risk 
of developing dementia was confirmed in a longitudinal analysis of the FHS 
Offspring Cohort (N = 2,264 individuals, hazard ratio [95% CI] = 1.27 
[1.07-1.49]).
DISCUSSION: Third-generation blood-based DNA methylation measures of aging could 
prove valuable for measuring differences between individuals in the rate at 
which they age and in their risk for cognitive decline, and for evaluating 
interventions to slow aging.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200898
PMCID: PMC9576288
PMID: 35794023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2018 Apr;76(4):231-240. doi: 10.1590/0004-282x20180025.

Argentina-Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative (Arg-ADNI): 
neuropsychological evolution profile after one-year follow up.

Méndez PC(1), Calandri I(1), Nahas F(1), Russo MJ(1), Demey I(1), Martín ME(1), 
Clarens MF(1), Harris P(1), Tapajoz F(1), Campos J(1), Surace EI(1), Martinetto 
H(1), Ventrice F(1), Cohen G(1), Vázquez S(1), Romero C(1), Guinjoan S(1), 
Allegri RF(1), Sevlever G(1).

Author information:
(1)Aging and Memory Center, Instituto de Investigaciones Neurológicas Raúl 
Carrea, Fundación para la Lucha contra las Enfermedades Neurologicas de la 
Infancia, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The Argentina-Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative (Arg-ADNI) study is a 
longitudinal prospective cohort of 50 participants at a single institution in 
Buenos Aires, Argentina. Longitudinal assessments on a neuropsychological test 
battery were performed on 15 controls, 24 mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
patients and 12 Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia patients. In our study 
population, there was a high prevalence of positive AD biomarkers in the AD 
group, 92.3% (12/13); and a low prevalence in the normal controls, 20%; almost 
half (48%) of the patients diagnosed with MCI had positive amyloid detection. 
After a one year, the significant differences found at baseline on 
neuropsychological testing were similar at the follow-up assessment even though 
the AD group had significantly altered its functional performance (FAQ and CDR). 
The exception was semantic fluency, which showed greater impairment between the 
AD group and MCI and normal controls respectively. For these tests, the addition 
of AD biomarkers as a variable did not significantly alter the variations 
previously found for the established clinical group's model. Finally, the 
one-year conversion rate to dementia was 20% in the MCI cohort.

DOI: 10.1590/0004-282x20180025
PMID: 29742242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. BMC Genomics. 2022 Jan 28;23(1):85. doi: 10.1186/s12864-021-08269-8.

Genome-Wide association study of quantitative biomarkers identifies a novel 
locus for alzheimer's disease at 12p12.1.

Lee B(1), Yao X(1), Shen L(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, Perelman School of 
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, Perelman School of 
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. 
li.shen@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Genetic study of quantitative biomarkers in Alzheimer's Disease (AD) 
is a promising method to identify novel genetic factors and relevant 
endophenotypes, which provides valuable information to deconvolute mechanistic 
complexity and better understand disease subtypes.
RESULTS: Using the data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI), we performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) between 565,373 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 16 key AD biomarkers from 1,576 
subjects at four visits. We identified a novel locus rs5011804 at 12p12.1 
significantly associated with several AD biomarkers, including three cognitive 
traits (CDRSB, FAQ, ADAS13) and one imaging trait (fusiform volume). Additional 
mediation and interaction analyses investigated the relationships among this 
SNP, relevant biomarkers, and clinical diagnosis, confirming and further 
elaborating the genetic effects seen in the GWAS.
CONCLUSION: Our GWAS not only affirms key AD genes but also suggests the 
promising role of the SNP rs5011804 due to its associations with several AD 
cognitive and imaging outcomes. The SNP rs5011804 has a reported association 
with adult asthma and slightly affects intracranial volume but has not been 
associated with AD before. Our novel findings contribute to a more comprehensive 
view of the molecular mechanism behind AD.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-021-08269-8
PMCID: PMC8796646
PMID: 35086473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


40. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2023;31:2468-2476. doi: 
10.1109/TNSRE.2023.3247590. Epub 2023 Jun 1.

Risk Prediction of Alzheimer's Disease Conversion in Mild Cognitive Impaired 
Population Based on Brain Age Estimation.

Liu W, Dong Q, Sun S, Shen J, Qian K, Hu B.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is one of the most common neurodegenerative diseases in 
the world. To reduce the incidence of AD, it's essential to quantify the AD 
conversion risk of mild cognitive impaired (MCI) individuals. Here, we propose 
an AD conversion risk estimation system (CRES), which contains an automated MRI 
feature extractor, brain age estimation (BAE) module, and AD conversion risk 
estimation module. The CRES is trained on 634 normal controls (NC) from the 
public IXI and OASIS cohorts, then it is evaluated on 462 subjects (106 NC, 102 
stable MCI (sMCI), 124 progressive MCI (pMCI) and 130 AD) from the ADNI dataset. 
Experimental results show that the MRI derived age gap (AG, chronological age 
subtracted from the estimated brain age) significantly distinguish NC, sMCI, 
pMCI and AD groups with p -value =0.000017 . Considering AG as the primary 
factor, incorporating gender and Minimum Mental State Examination (MMSE) for 
more robust Cox multi-variate hazard analysis, we concluded that each additional 
year in AG is associated with 4.57% greater AD conversion risk for the MCI 
group. Furthermore, a nomogram was drawn to describe MCI conversion risk at the 
individual level in the next 1 year, 3 years, 5 years and even 8 years from 
baseline. This work demonstrates that CRES can estimate AG based on MRI data, 
evaluate AD conversion risk of the MCI subjects, and identify the individuals 
with high AD conversion risk, which is valuable for effective intervention and 
diagnosis within an early period.

DOI: 10.1109/TNSRE.2023.3247590
PMID: 37027670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2018 Jul 20;5(9):1037-1047. doi: 10.1002/acn3.615. 
eCollection 2018 Sep.

Pre-amyloid stage of Alzheimer's disease in cognitively normal individuals.

Tijms BM(1), Vermunt L(1), Zwan MD(1), van Harten AC(1), van der Flier WM(1)(2), 
Teunissen CE(2), Scheltens P(1), Visser PJ(1)(3); for ADNI.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer Center Department of Neurology VU University Medical Center 
Amsterdam Neuroscience Amsterdam The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics VU University Medical Center 
Amsterdam Neuroscience Amsterdam The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Psychiatry & Neuropsychology School for Mental Health and 
Neuroscience Maastricht University Maastricht The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To study risk factors for decreasing aβ1-42 concentrations in 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in cognitively unimpaired individuals with initially 
normal amyloid and tau markers, and to investigate whether such aβ1-42 decreases 
are associated with subsequent decline in cognition and other biomarkers of 
Alzheimer's disease.
METHODS: Cognitively normal subjects (n = 83, 75 ± 5 years, 35(42%) female) with 
normal CSF aβ1-42 and tau and repeated CSF sampling were selected from ADNI. 
Subject level slopes of aβ1-42 decreases were estimated with mixed models. We 
tested associations of baseline APP processing markers (BACE1 activity, aβ1-40, 
aβ1-38 and sAPP β) and decreasing aβ1-42 levels by including an interaction term 
between time and APP marker. Associations between decreasing aβ1-42 levels and 
clinical decline (i.e., progression to mild cognitive impairment or dementia, 
MMSE, memory functioning) and biological decline (tau, hippocampal volume, 
glucose processing and amyloid PET) over a time period of 8-10 years were 
assessed.
RESULTS: Aβ1-42 levels decreased annually with -4.6 ± 1 pg/mL. Higher baseline 
BACE1 activity (β(se) = -0.06(0.03), P < 0.05), aβ1-40 (β(se)= -0.11(.03), P < 
0.001), and aβ1-38 levels (β(se) = -0.11(0.03), P < 0.001) predicted faster 
decreasing aβ1-42. The fastest tertile of decreasing aβ1-42 rates was associated 
with subsequent pathophysiological processes: 11(14%) subjects developed 
abnormal amyloid levels after 3 ± 1.7 years, showed increased risk for clinical 
progression (Hazard Ratio[95CI] = 4.8[1.1-21.0]), decreases in MMSE, glucose 
metabolism and hippocampal volume, and increased CSF tau and amyloid aggregation 
on PET (all P < 0.05).
INTERPRETATION: Higher APP processing and fast decreasing aβ1-42 could be among 
the earliest, pre-amyloid, pathological changes in Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1002/acn3.615
PMCID: PMC6144448
PMID: 30250861


42. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;84(3):1323-1335. doi: 10.3233/JAD-210700.

Association Between Polygenic Risk Score and the Progression from Mild Cognitive 
Impairment to Alzheimer's Disease.

Liu H(1)(2), Lutz M(3), Luo S(4); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Population Health Sciences, Duke University School of Medicine, 
Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Division of Translational Brain Sciences, Department of Neurology, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, NC, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a heterogeneous condition and MCI 
patients are at increased risk of progression to dementia due to Alzheimer's 
disease (AD).
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we aim to evaluate the associations between polygenic 
risk scores (PRSs) and 1) time to AD progression from MCI, 2) changes in 
longitudinal cognitive impairment, and 3) biomarkers from cerebrospinal fluid 
and imaging.
METHODS: We constructed PRS by using 40 independent non-APOE SNPs from 
well-replicated AD GWASs and tested its association with the progression time 
from MCI to AD by using 767 MCI patients from the ADNI study and 1373 patients 
from the NACC study. PRSs calculated with other methods were also computed.
RESULTS: We found that the PRS constructed with SNPs that reached genome-wide 
significance predicted the progression from MCI to AD (beta = 0.182, SE = 0.061, 
p = 0.003) after adjusting for the demographic and clinical variables. This 
association was replicated in the NACC dataset (beta = 0.094, SE = 0.037, 
p = 0.009). Further analyses revealed that PRS was associated with the increased 
ADAS-Cog11/ADAS-Cog13/ADASQ4 scores, tau/ptau levels, and cortical amyloid 
burdens (PiB-PET and AV45-PET), but decreased hippocampus and entorhinal cortex 
volumes (p < 0.05). Mediation analysis showed that the effect of PRS on the 
increased risk of AD may be mediated by Aβ42 (beta = 0.056, SE = 0.026, 
p = 0.036).
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that PRS can be useful for the prediction of 
time to AD and other clinical changes after the diagnosis of MCI.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-210700
PMCID: PMC8957404
PMID: 34657885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;58(2):361-371. doi: 10.3233/JAD-161201.

Prediction of Conversion to Alzheimer's Disease with Longitudinal Measures and 
Time-To-Event Data.

Li K(1), Chan W(1), Doody RS(2), Quinn J(3), Luo S(1); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)F. Hoffman-La Roche, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University and Portland VA 
Medical Center, Portland, OR, USA.

BACKGROUND: Identifying predictors of conversion to Alzheimer's disease (AD) is 
critically important for AD prevention and targeted treatment.
OBJECTIVE: To compare various clinical and biomarker trajectories for tracking 
progression and predicting conversion from amnestic mild cognitive impairment to 
probable AD.
METHODS: Participants were from the ADNI-1 study. We assessed the ability of 33 
longitudinal biomarkers to predict time to AD conversion, accounting for 
demographic and genetic factors. We used joint modelling of longitudinal and 
survival data to examine the association between changes of measures and disease 
progression. We also employed time-dependent receiver operating characteristic 
method to assess the discriminating capability of the measures.
RESULTS: 23 of 33 longitudinal clinical and imaging measures are significant 
predictors of AD conversion beyond demographic and genetic factors. The strong 
phenotypic and biological predictors are in the cognitive domain (ADAS-Cog; 
RAVLT), functional domain (FAQ), and neuroimaging domain (middle temporal gyrus 
and hippocampal volume). The strongest predictor is ADAS-Cog 13 with an increase 
of one SD in ADAS-Cog 13 increased the risk of AD conversion by 2.92 times.
CONCLUSION: Prediction of AD conversion can be improved by incorporating 
longitudinal change information, in addition to baseline characteristics. 
Cognitive measures are consistently significant and generally stronger 
predictors than imaging measures.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-161201
PMCID: PMC5477671
PMID: 28436391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors have no 
conflict of interest to report.


44. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2024 Oct;51(12):3617-3629. doi: 
10.1007/s00259-024-06784-w. Epub 2024 Jun 6.

[(18)F]FDG PET integrated with structural MRI for accurate brain age prediction.

Xue L(#)(1)(2)(3), Fu Y(#)(4)(5), Gao X(#)(6), Feng G(6), Qian S(1)(2)(3), Wei 
L(7), Li L(7), Zhuo C(4), Zhang H(8)(9)(10)(11)(12), Tian M(13)(14)(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine and PET Center, The Second Affiliated Hospital 
of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging of Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Imaging of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China.
(4)College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(5)School of Information Science and Engineering, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 
Gansu, China.
(6)Shanghai Universal Medical Imaging Diagnostic Center, Shanghai, China.
(7)Huashan Hospital & Human Phenome Institute, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(8)Department of Nuclear Medicine and PET Center, The Second Affiliated Hospital 
of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. 
hzhang21@zju.edu.cn.
(9)Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging of Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. hzhang21@zju.edu.cn.
(10)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Imaging of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China. hzhang21@zju.edu.cn.
(11)College of Biomedical Engineering & Instrument Science, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. hzhang21@zju.edu.cn.
(12)Key Laboratory for Biomedical Engineering of Ministry of Education, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. hzhang21@zju.edu.cn.
(13)Department of Nuclear Medicine and PET Center, The Second Affiliated 
Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. 
tianmei@fudan.edu.cn.
(14)Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging of Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. tianmei@fudan.edu.cn.
(15)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Imaging of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China. tianmei@fudan.edu.cn.
(16)Huashan Hospital & Human Phenome Institute, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China. tianmei@fudan.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Brain aging is a complex and heterogeneous process characterized by 
both structural and functional decline. This study aimed to establish a novel 
deep learning (DL) method for predicting brain age by utilizing structural and 
metabolic imaging data.
METHODS: The dataset comprised participants from both the Universal Medical 
Imaging Diagnostic Center (UMIDC) and the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI). The former recruited 395 normal control (NC) subjects, while 
the latter included 438 NC subjects, 51 mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
subjects, and 56 Alzheimer's disease (AD) subjects. We developed a novel 
dual-pathway, 3D simple fully convolutional network (Dual-SFCNeXt) to estimate 
brain age using [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography ([18F]FDG 
PET) and structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) images of NC subjects as 
input. Several prevailing DL models were trained and tested using either MRI or 
PET data for comparison. Model accuracies were evaluated using mean absolute 
error (MAE) and Pearson's correlation coefficient (r). Brain age gap (BAG), 
deviations of brain age from chronologic age, was correlated with cognitive 
assessments in MCI and AD subjects.
RESULTS: Both PET- and MRI-based models achieved high prediction accuracy. The 
leading model was the SFCNeXt (the single-pathway version) for PET (MAE = 2.92, 
r = 0.96) and MRI (MAE = 3.23, r = 0.95) on all samples. By integrating both PET 
and MRI images, the Dual-SFCNeXt demonstrated significantly improved accuracy 
(MAE = 2.37, r = 0.97) compared to all single-modality models. Significantly 
higher BAG was observed in both the AD (P < 0.0001) and MCI (P < 0.0001) groups 
compared to the NC group. BAG correlated significantly with Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) scores (r=-0.390 for AD, r=-0.436 for MCI) and the Clinical 
Dementia Rating Scale Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) scores (r = 0.333 for AD, r = 0.372 
for MCI).
CONCLUSION: The integration of [18F]FDG PET with structural MRI enhances the 
accuracy of brain age prediction, potentially introducing a new avenue for 
related multimodal brain age prediction studies.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00259-024-06784-w
PMID: 38839623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2020 May;28(5):507-517. doi: 
10.1016/j.jagp.2019.11.003. Epub 2019 Nov 11.

Statin Use and Risk of Cognitive Decline in the ADNI Cohort.

Kemp EC(1), Ebner MK(2), Ramanan S(2), Godek TA(2), Pugh EA(2), Bartlett HH(2), 
McDonald JW(2), Mecca MC(3), van Dyck CH(4), Mecca AP(2); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Research Unit, Yale University School of Medicine (ECK, 
MKE, SR, TAG, EAP, HHB, JWM, CHvD, APM), New Haven, CT; Department of 
Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine (ECK, MKE, SR, TAG, EAP, HHB, 
JWM, CHvD, APM), New Haven, CT. Electronic address: emilyclairekemp@gmail.com.
(2)Alzheimer's Disease Research Unit, Yale University School of Medicine (ECK, 
MKE, SR, TAG, EAP, HHB, JWM, CHvD, APM), New Haven, CT; Department of 
Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine (ECK, MKE, SR, TAG, EAP, HHB, 
JWM, CHvD, APM), New Haven, CT.
(3)Veterans Affairs Connecticut Healthcare System (MCM), West Haven, CT; 
Department of Internal Medicine, Geriatrics Section, and the Program on Aging, 
Yale University School of Medicine (MCM), New Haven, CT.
(4)Alzheimer's Disease Research Unit, Yale University School of Medicine (ECK, 
MKE, SR, TAG, EAP, HHB, JWM, CHvD, APM), New Haven, CT; Department of 
Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine (ECK, MKE, SR, TAG, EAP, HHB, 
JWM, CHvD, APM), New Haven, CT; Department of Neuroscience, Yale University 
School of Medicine (CHvD), New Haven, CT; Department of Neurology, Yale 
University School of Medicine (CHvD), New Haven, CT.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate associations between statin use and cognitive change, 
as well as diagnostic conversion, in individuals with cognitively normal (CN) 
status, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and dementia due to Alzheimer disease 
(AD-dementia).
METHODS: A multicenter cohort study with 1629 adults 48 to 91 years old with CN 
status, early MCI (EMCI), late MCI (LMCI), or AD-dementia at baseline followed 
prospectively for 24 months. Statin use was assessed at baseline, and cognition 
was measured over time with a composite memory score, a composite executive 
function score, and a global cognition score (Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale). Conversion to a more impaired diagnostic category was determined by 
clinician assessment. Repeated measures linear mixed-effects models were used to 
evaluate associations between statin use and change in cognition over time. Cox 
proportional hazards models were used to evaluate associations between statin 
use and time to diagnostic conversion. All models were stratified by baseline 
diagnostic group.
RESULTS: Statin use was not associated with change in cognitive measures for CN, 
LMCI, or AD-dementia participants. Among EMCI participants, statin use was 
associated with a significantly slower rate of decline on the memory composite, 
but no other cognitive measure. Statin use was not associated with time to 
conversion for any diagnostic group.
CONCLUSIONS: This study did not support an association between statin use and 
diagnostic conversion but suggested a possible association between statin use 
and cognitive change in EMCI. Additional randomized clinical trials of statins 
may be warranted in the prodromal EMCI stage of AD.

Copyright © 2019 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jagp.2019.11.003
PMCID: PMC7170771
PMID: 31806426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures None of the authors have actual or 
potential conflicts of interest to disclose that are related to this research.


46. Brain Sci. 2022 Nov 15;12(11):1555. doi: 10.3390/brainsci12111555.

Altered Functional Connectivity of Basal Ganglia in Mild Cognitive Impairment 
and Alzheimer's Disease.

Xiong Y(1), Ye C(1), Chen Y(1), Zhong X(1), Chen H(2), Sun R(1), Zhang J(1), 
Zhong Z(1), Huang M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Seventh Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Shenzhen 518107, China.
(2)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, The Seventh Affiliated Hospital, 
Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 518107, China.

(1) Background: Alzheimer's disease (AD), an age-progressive neurodegenerative 
disease that affects cognitive function, causes changes in the functional 
connectivity of the default-mode network (DMN). However, the question of whether 
AD-related changes occur in the functional connectivity of the basal ganglia has 
rarely been specifically analyzed. This study aimed to measure the changes in 
basal ganglia functional connectivity among patients with AD and mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) in their resting state using the functional connectivity 
density (FCD) value, the functional connectivity (FC) intensity, and the graph 
theory index, and to confirm their influence on clinical manifestations. (2) 
Methods: Resting-state functional MRI (rs-fMRI) and neuropsychological data from 
48 participants in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) were 
used for analyses. The 48 ADNI participants comprised 16 patients with AD, 16 
patients with MCI, and 16 normal controls (NCs). The functional connectivity of 
basal ganglia was evaluated by FCDs, FC strength, and graph theory index. We 
compared voxel-based FCD values between groups to show specific regions with 
significant variation and significant connectivity from ROI conduction to ROI 
analysis. Pearson's correlation analyses between functional connectivity and 
several simultaneous clinical variables were also conducted. Additionally, 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses associated with classification 
were conducted for both FCD values and graph theory indices. (3) Results: The 
level of FCD in patients with cognitive impairment showed obvious abnormalities 
(including short-range and long-range FCD). In addition to DMN-related regions, 
aberrant functional connectivity was also found to be present in the basal 
ganglia, especially in the caudate and amygdala. The FCD values of the basal 
ganglia (involving the caudate and amygdala) were closely related to scores from 
the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the Functional Activities 
Questionnaire (FAQ); meanwhile, the graph theory indices (involving global 
efficiency and degree) of the basal ganglia (involving the caudate, amygdala, 
and putamen) were also found to be closely correlated with MMSE scores. In ROC 
analyses of both FCD and graph theory, the amygdala was of the utmost importance 
in the early-stage detection of MCI; additionally, the caudate nucleus was found 
to be crucial in the progression of cognitive decline and AD diagnosis. (4) 
Conclusions: It was systematically confirmed that there is a phenomenon of 
change in the functional connections in the basal ganglia during cognitive 
decline. The findings of this study could improve our understanding of AD and 
MCI pathology in the basal ganglia and make it possible to propose new targets 
for AD treatment in further studies.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci12111555
PMCID: PMC9688931
PMID: 36421879

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


47. J Genet. 2021;100:60.

Longitudinal analysis of APOE-ɛ4 genotype with the logical memory delayed recall 
score in Alzheimer's disease.

Fokuoh E(1), Xiao D, Fang W, Liu Y, Lu Y, Wang K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, College of Public Health, East 
Tennessee State University, Johnson City, TN 37614, USA 
kesheng.wang@hsc.wvu.edu.

No study has focussed on the longitudinal effect of APOE-ɛ4 genotype on the 
logical memory delayed recall total (LDELTOTAL) score in late-onset Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). The LDELTOTAL scores were collected at baseline, 12, 24, 36 and 48 
months from 382 participants with AD, 503 with cognitive normal (CN), 1293 with 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI). A linear mixed model (LMM) was used to investigate the effect 
of APOE-ɛ4 on the longitudinal changes in the LDELTOTAL scores adjusted for age, 
gender, education and baseline Mini Mental State Examination score. There were 
significant differences in LDELTOTAL scores among AD, CN, and MCI (P<0.0001) and 
among APOE-ɛ4 alleles at baseline (P<0.0001). In the multivariable LMM, elders 
with 75+ years (P = 0.0051), females (P<0.0001), lower education (P<0.0001), AD 
and MCI (both P values <0.0001) were associated with decreased LDELTOTAL values, 
while the individuals with 1 or 2 APOE-ɛ4 allele revealed significantly lower 
LDELTOTAL scores (both P values<0.0001) compared with individuals without 
APOE-ɛ4 allele. Further, APOE-ɛ4 alleles had significant interactions with four 
follow-up visits, where all follow-up visits showed significantly higher 
LDELTOTAL score. In addition, gender showed interaction with age, education and 
APOE-ɛ4 with follow-up visits. Our findings provide the first evidence of the 
effect of APOE-ɛ4 genotype on the logical memory declines related to AD. 
Further, APOE-ɛ4 alleles showed interactions with gender and follow-up visits.

PMID: 34470924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Front Aging Neurosci. 2017 Nov 20;9:378. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00378. 
eCollection 2017.

Decreased Complexity in Alzheimer's Disease: Resting-State fMRI Evidence of 
Brain Entropy Mapping.

Wang B(1)(2), Niu Y(1), Miao L(1), Cao R(1), Yan P(1), Guo H(1), Li D(1), Guo 
Y(1), Yan T(3)(4), Wu J(5)(6), Xiang J(1), Zhang H(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Computer Science and Technology, Taiyuan University of Technology, 
Taiyuan, China.
(2)Department of Radiology, First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, 
Taiyuan, China.
(3)School of Life Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Convergence Medical Engineering System and Healthcare 
Technology, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, Beijing Institute 
of Technology, Beijing, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Biomimetic Robots and Systems, Ministry of Education, 
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China.
(6)Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Okayama University, 
Okayama, Japan.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a frequently observed, irreversible brain function 
disorder among elderly individuals. Resting-state functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (rs-fMRI) has been introduced as an alternative approach to assessing 
brain functional abnormalities in AD patients. However, alterations in the brain 
rs-fMRI signal complexities in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD patients 
remain unclear. Here, we described the novel application of permutation entropy 
(PE) to investigate the abnormal complexity of rs-fMRI signals in MCI and AD 
patients. The rs-fMRI signals of 30 normal controls (NCs), 33 early MCI (EMCI), 
32 late MCI (LMCI), and 29 AD patients were obtained from the Alzheimer's 
disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. After preprocessing, 
whole-brain entropy maps of the four groups were extracted and subjected to 
Gaussian smoothing. We performed a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) on the 
brain entropy maps of the four groups. The results after adjusting for age and 
sex differences together revealed that the patients with AD exhibited lower 
complexity than did the MCI and NC controls. We found five clusters that 
exhibited significant differences and were distributed primarily in the 
occipital, frontal, and temporal lobes. The average PE of the five clusters 
exhibited a decreasing trend from MCI to AD. The AD group exhibited the least 
complexity. Additionally, the average PE of the five clusters was significantly 
positively correlated with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores and 
significantly negatively correlated with Functional Assessment Questionnaire 
(FAQ) scores and global Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scores in the patient 
groups. Significant correlations were also found between the PE and regional 
homogeneity (ReHo) in the patient groups. These results indicated that declines 
in PE might be related to changes in regional functional homogeneity in AD. 
These findings suggested that complexity analyses using PE in rs-fMRI signals 
can provide important information about the fMRI characteristics of cognitive 
impairments in MCI and AD.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00378
PMCID: PMC5701971
PMID: 29209199


49. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2021 Jul;36(7):1050-1058. doi: 10.1002/gps.5530. Epub 
2021 Mar 15.

Affective symptoms and regional cerebral tau burden in early-stage Alzheimer's 
disease.

Tommasi NS(1)(2), Gonzalez C(1)(2)(3), Briggs D(1)(2)(3), Properzi MJ(3), 
Gatchel JR(4)(5), Marshall GA(1)(2)(3); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Center for Alzheimer Research and Treatment, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Belmont, Massachusetts, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS) are often present in individuals with 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia. NPS are 
associated with structural and functional changes in the brain such as atrophy, 
regional hypometabolism, and hypoperfusion, considered proxies of 
neurodegeneration. Our objective was to evaluate the association between NPS and 
regional cerebral tau burden, a more direct representation of neurodegeneration, 
in cognitively normal (CN), MCI, and AD dementia individuals.
METHODS: Cross-sectional NPS were assessed using the Neuropsychiatric Inventory 
(NPI) in 410 CN, 199 MCI, and 61 AD dementia participants who underwent 
flortaucipir tau positron emission tomography as part of the AD Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI). Total NPI score and two factors of NPS (affective and 
hyperactive) were used in analyses. Linear regression models with backward 
elimination were employed with NPI as dependent variable and regional tau or 
tau-amyloid interaction as predictor of interest. Covariates included education, 
age, sex, Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test Total Learning, and Trail Making 
Test B.
RESULTS: There were significant associations (p < 0.05) between the NPI 
variables (total score, Affective factor) and entorhinal and precuneus tau 
across all participants. These associations were also significant for the 
tau-amyloid interaction. These effects were significant in cognitively 
symptomatic participants (MCI and AD dementia), but not in CN participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased tau burden in the entorhinal and precuneus cortices was 
modestly associated with greater NPS in MCI and AD dementia. Further evaluation 
of NPS and their effect on early-stage AD could aid in finding new interventions 
and slowing disease progression.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.5530
PMCID: PMC8187284
PMID: 33682933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Brain Behav. 2017 Jun 9;7(7):e00733. doi: 10.1002/brb3.733. eCollection 2017 
Jul.

Feature selective temporal prediction of Alzheimer's disease progression using 
hippocampus surface morphometry.

Tsao S(1), Gajawelli N(1), Zhou J(2), Shi J(3), Ye J(4), Wang Y(3), Leporé N(1).

Author information:
(1)CIBORG Children's Hospital Los Angeles and University of Southern California 
Los Angeles CA USA.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Engineering Michigan State University East 
Lansing MI USA.
(3)School of Computing, Informatics and Decision Systems Engineering Arizona 
State University Phoenix AZ USA.
(4)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics & Department of 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science University of Michigan Ann Arbor MI 
USA.

INTRODUCTION: Prediction of Alzheimer's disease (AD) progression based on 
baseline measures allows us to understand disease progression and has 
implications in decisions concerning treatment strategy. To this end, we combine 
a predictive multi-task machine learning method (cFSGL) with a novel MR-based 
multivariate morphometric surface map of the hippocampus (mTBM) to predict 
future cognitive scores of patients.
METHODS: Previous work has shown that a multi-task learning framework that 
performs prediction of all future time points simultaneously (cFSGL) can be used 
to encode both sparsity as well as temporal smoothness. The authors showed that 
this method is able to predict cognitive outcomes of ADNI subjects using 
FreeSurfer-based baseline MRI features, MMSE score demographic information and 
ApoE status. Whilst volumetric information may hold generalized information on 
brain status, we hypothesized that hippocampus specific information may be more 
useful in predictive modeling of AD. To this end, we applied a multivariate 
tensor-based parametric surface analysis method (mTBM) to extract features from 
the hippocampal surfaces.
RESULTS: We combined mTBM features with traditional surface features such as 
middle axis distance, the Jacobian determinant as well as 2 of the Jacobian 
principal eigenvalues to yield 7 normalized hippocampal surface maps of 300 
points each. By combining these 7 × 300 = 2100 features together with the 
previous ~350 features, we illustrate how this type of sparsifying method can be 
applied to an entire surface map of the hippocampus that yields a feature space 
that is 2 orders of magnitude larger than what was previously attempted.
CONCLUSIONS: By combining the power of the cFSGL multi-task machine learning 
framework with the addition of AD sensitive mTBM feature maps of the hippocampus 
surface, we are able to improve the predictive performance of ADAS cognitive 
scores 6, 12, 24, 36 and 48 months from baseline.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.733
PMCID: PMC5516607
PMID: 28729939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Predict Intell Med. 2019 Oct;11843:1-10. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-32281-6_1. Epub 
2019 Oct 10.

TADPOLE Challenge: Accurate Alzheimer's disease prediction through crowdsourced 
forecasting of future data.

Marinescu RV(1)(2), Oxtoby NP(2), Young AL(2), Bron EE(3), Toga AW(4), Weiner 
MW(5), Barkhof F(3)(6), Fox NC(7), Golland P(1), Klein S(3), Alexander DC(2).

Author information:
(1)Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT, USA.
(2)Centre for Medical Image Computing, University College London, UK.
(3)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Erasmus MC, Netherlands.
(4)Laboratory of NeuroImaging, University of Southern California, USA.
(5)Center for Imaging of Neurodegenerative Diseases, UCSF, USA.
(6)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, VU Medical Centre, Netherlands.
(7)Dementia Research Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, UK.

The Alzheimer's Disease Prediction Of Longitudinal Evolution (TADPOLE) Challenge 
compares the performance of algorithms at predicting the future evolution of 
individuals at risk of Alzheimer's disease. TADPOLE Challenge participants train 
their models and algorithms on historical data from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) study. Participants are then required to make 
forecasts of three key outcomes for ADNI-3 rollover participants: clinical 
diagnosis, Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale Cognitive Subdomain (ADAS-Cog 
13), and total volume of the ventricles - which are then compared with future 
measurements. Strong points of the challenge are that the test data did not 
exist at the time of forecasting (it was acquired afterwards), and that it 
focuses on the challenging problem of cohort selection for clinical trials by 
identifying fast progressors. The submission phase of TADPOLE was open until 15 
November 2017; since then data has been acquired until April 2019 from 219 
subjects with 223 clinical visits and 150 Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) 
scans, which was used for the evaluation of the participants' predictions. 
Thirty-three teams participated with a total of 92 submissions. No single 
submission was best at predicting all three outcomes. For diagnosis prediction, 
the best forecast (team Frog), which was based on gradient boosting, obtained a 
multiclass area under the receiver-operating curve (MAUC) of 0.931, while for 
ventricle prediction the best forecast (team EMC1 ), which was based on disease 
progression modelling and spline regression, obtained mean absolute error of 
0.41% of total intracranial volume (ICV). For ADAS-Cog 13, no forecast was 
considerably better than the benchmark mixed effects model (BenchmarkME ), 
provided to participants before the submission deadline. Further analysis can 
help understand which input features and algorithms are most suitable for 
Alzheimer's disease prediction and for aiding patient stratification in clinical 
trials. The submission system remains open via the website: 
https://tadpole.grand-challenge.org/.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-32281-6_1
PMCID: PMC7315046
PMID: 32587957


52. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2023 Sep 25;30(10):1645-1656. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocad135.

Using artificial intelligence to learn optimal regimen plan for Alzheimer's 
disease.

Bhattarai K(1), Rajaganapathy S(2), Das T(3), Kim Y(4), Chen Y(2); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; Australian Imaging Biomarkers and Lifestyle 
Flagship Study of Ageing; Dai Q(2), Li X(2), Jiang X(4), Zong N(2).

Author information:
(1)Luther College, Decorah, Iowa, USA.
(2)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(3)University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois, USA.
(4)University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2023 Jan 29:2023.01.26.23285064. doi: 10.1101/2023.01.26.23285064.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurological disorder with 
no specific curative medications. Sophisticated clinical skills are crucial to 
optimize treatment regimens given the multiple coexisting comorbidities in the 
patient population.
OBJECTIVE: Here, we propose a study to leverage reinforcement learning (RL) to 
learn the clinicians' decisions for AD patients based on the longitude data from 
electronic health records.
METHODS: In this study, we selected 1736 patients from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. We focused on the two most frequent 
concomitant diseases-depression, and hypertension, thus creating 5 data cohorts 
(ie, Whole Data, AD, AD-Hypertension, AD-Depression, and 
AD-Depression-Hypertension). We modeled the treatment learning into an RL 
problem by defining states, actions, and rewards. We built a regression model 
and decision tree to generate multiple states, used six combinations of 
medications (ie, cholinesterase inhibitors, memantine, memantine-cholinesterase 
inhibitors, hypertension drugs, supplements, or no drugs) as actions, and 
Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) scores as rewards.
RESULTS: Given the proper dataset, the RL model can generate an optimal policy 
(regimen plan) that outperforms the clinician's treatment regimen. Optimal 
policies (ie, policy iteration and Q-learning) had lower rewards than the 
clinician's policy (mean -3.03 and -2.93 vs. -2.93, respectively) for smaller 
datasets but had higher rewards for larger datasets (mean -4.68 and -2.82 vs. 
-4.57, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results highlight the potential of using RL to generate the 
optimal treatment based on the patients' longitude records. Our work can lead 
the path towards developing RL-based decision support systems that could help 
manage AD with comorbidities.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocad135
PMCID: PMC10531148
PMID: 37463858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


53. Front Neurosci. 2022 Jan 3;15:744190. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.744190. 
eCollection 2021.

Toward a Multimodal Computer-Aided Diagnostic Tool for Alzheimer's Disease 
Conversion.

Pena D, Suescun J, Schiess M, Ellmore TM, Giancardo L; Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder. It is one 
of the leading sources of morbidity and mortality in the aging population AD 
cardinal symptoms include memory and executive function impairment that 
profoundly alters a patient's ability to perform activities of daily living. 
People with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) exhibit many of the early clinical 
symptoms of patients with AD and have a high chance of converting to AD in their 
lifetime. Diagnostic criteria rely on clinical assessment and brain magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI). Many groups are working to help automate this process 
to improve the clinical workflow. Current computational approaches are focused 
on predicting whether or not a subject with MCI will convert to AD in the 
future. To our knowledge, limited attention has been given to the development of 
automated computer-assisted diagnosis (CAD) systems able to provide an AD 
conversion diagnosis in MCI patient cohorts followed longitudinally. This is 
important as these CAD systems could be used by primary care providers to 
monitor patients with MCI. The method outlined in this paper addresses this gap 
and presents a computationally efficient pre-processing and prediction pipeline, 
and is designed for recognizing patterns associated with AD conversion. We 
propose a new approach that leverages longitudinal data that can be easily 
acquired in a clinical setting (e.g., T1-weighted magnetic resonance images, 
cognitive tests, and demographic information) to identify the AD conversion 
point in MCI subjects with AUC = 84.7. In contrast, cognitive tests and 
demographics alone achieved AUC = 80.6, a statistically significant difference 
(n = 669, p < 0.05). We designed a convolutional neural network that is 
computationally efficient and requires only linear registration between imaging 
time points. The model architecture combines Attention and Inception 
architectures while utilizing both cross-sectional and longitudinal imaging and 
clinical information. Additionally, the top brain regions and clinical features 
that drove the model's decision were investigated. These included the thalamus, 
caudate, planum temporale, and the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test. We believe 
our method could be easily translated into the healthcare setting as an 
objective AD diagnostic tool for patients with MCI.

Copyright © 2022 Pena, Suescun, Schiess, Ellmore, Giancardo and the Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2021.744190
PMCID: PMC8761739
PMID: 35046766

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


54. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 20;9(8):e105542. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105542. 
eCollection 2014.

Predicting progression of Alzheimer's disease using ordinal regression.

Doyle OM(1), Westman E(2), Marquand AF(1), Mecocci P(3), Vellas B(4), Tsolaki 
M(5), Kłoszewska I(6), Soininen H(7), Lovestone S(8), Williams SC(9), Simmons 
A(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroimaging, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Neuroimaging, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, 
London, United Kingdom; Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Institute of Gerontology and Geriatrics, University of Perugia, Perugia, 
Italy.
(4)INSERM U 558, University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(5)Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(6)Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(7)University of Eastern Finland and University Hospital of Kuopio, Kuopio, 
Finland.
(8)NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health at South London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Neuroimaging, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, 
London, United Kingdom; NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health at 
South London, London, United Kingdom; Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, 
United Kingdom; Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(10)Department of Neuroimaging, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, 
London, United Kingdom; NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health at 
South London, London, United Kingdom; NIHR Biomedical Research Unit for Dementia 
at South London, London, United Kingdom; Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, 
United Kingdom; Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

We propose a novel approach to predicting disease progression in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD)--multivariate ordinal regression--which inherently models the 
ordered nature of brain atrophy spanning normal aging (CTL) to mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) to AD. Ordinal regression provides probabilistic class 
predictions as well as a continuous index of disease progression--the ORCHID 
(Ordinal Regression Characteristic Index of Dementia) score. We applied ordinal 
regression to 1023 baseline structural MRI scans from two studies: the US-based 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and the European based 
AddNeuroMed program. Here, the acquired AddNeuroMed dataset was used as a 
completely independent test set for the ordinal regression model trained on the 
ADNI cohort providing an optimal assessment of model generalizability. 
Distinguishing CTL-like (CTL and stable MCI) from AD-like (MCI converters and 
AD) resulted in balanced accuracies of 82% (cross-validation) for ADNI and 79% 
(independent test set) for AddNeuroMed. For prediction of conversion from MCI to 
AD, balanced accuracies of 70% (AUC of 0.75) and 75% (AUC of 0.81) were 
achieved. The ORCHID score was computed for all subjects. We showed that this 
measure significantly correlated with MMSE at 12 months (ρ =  -0.64, ADNI and ρ 
=  -0.59, AddNeuroMed). Additionally, the ORCHID score can help fractionate 
subjects with unstable diagnoses (e.g. reverters and healthy controls who later 
progressed to MCI), moderately late converters (12-24 months) and late 
converters (24-36 months). A comparison with results in the literature and 
direct comparison with a binary classifier suggests that the performance of this 
framework is highly competitive.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105542
PMCID: PMC4139338
PMID: 25141298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


55. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2022 Jan;213:106503. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106503. Epub 2021 Nov 6.

Ranking convolutional neural network for Alzheimer's disease mini-mental state 
examination prediction at multiple time-points.

Qiao H(1), Chen L(2), Zhu F(3).

Author information:
(1)Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Chongqing 400714, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing 100049, China. Electronic address: qiaohezhe@cigit.ac.cn.
(2)Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Chongqing 400714, China. Electronic address: chenlin@cigit.ac.cn.
(3)Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Chongqing 400714, China. Electronic address: zhufan@cigit.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a fatal neurodegenerative 
disease. Predicting Mini-mental state examination (MMSE) based on magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) plays an important role in monitoring the progress of 
AD. Existing machine learning based methods cast MMSE prediction as a single 
metric regression problem simply and ignore the relationship between subjects 
with various scores.
METHODS: In this study, we proposed a ranking convolutional neural network 
(rankCNN) to address the prediction of MMSE through muti-classification. 
Specifically, we use a 3D convolutional neural network with sharing weights to 
extract the feature from MRI, followed by multiple sub-networks which transform 
the cognitive regression into a series of simpler binary classification. In 
addition, we further use a ranking layer to measure the ranking information 
between samples to strengthen the ability of the classification by extracting 
more discriminative features.
RESULTS: We evaluated the proposed model on ADNI-1 and ADNI-2 datasets with a 
total of 1,569 subjects. The Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) of our proposed 
model at baseline is 2.238 and 2.434 on ADNI-1 and ADNI-2, respectively. 
Extensive experimental results on ADNI-1 and ADNI-2 datasets demonstrate that 
our proposed model is superior to several state-of-the-art methods at both 
baseline and future MMSE prediction of subjects.
CONCLUSION: This paper provides a new method that can effectively predict the 
MMSE at baseline and future time points using baseline MRI, making it possible 
to use MRI for accurate early diagnosis of AD. The source code is freely 
available at https://github.com/fengduqianhe/ADrankCNN-master.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106503
PMID: 34798407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest All authors 
declared no conflict of interests. The authors declared that they have no 
conflicts of interest to this work. We declare that we do not have any 
commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in 
connection with the manuscript submitted entitled with: “Ranking convolutional 
neural network for Alzheimer’s disease mini-mental state examination prediction 
at multiple time-points”.


56. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Jan 29:2023.01.26.23285064. doi: 
10.1101/2023.01.26.23285064.

Using Artificial Intelligence to Learn Optimal Regimen Plan for Alzheimer's 
Disease.

Bhattarai K(1), Das T(2), Kim Y(3), Chen Y(4), Dai Q(4), Li X(4), Jiang X(3), 
Zong N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Luther College Decorah, IA, United States.
(2)Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 
Champaign, Champaign, IL, United States.
(3)School of Biomedical Informatics, University of Texas Health Science Center, 
Houston, TX, United States.
(4)Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN, United States.

Update in
    J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2023 Sep 25;30(10):1645-1656. doi: 
10.1093/jamia/ocad135.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is a progressive neurological disorder with 
no specific curative medications. While only a few medications are approved by 
FDA (i.e., donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine, and memantine) to relieve 
symptoms (e.g., cognitive decline), sophisticated clinical skills are crucial to 
optimize the appropriate regimens given the multiple coexisting comorbidities in 
this patient population.
OBJECTIVE: Here, we propose a study to leverage reinforcement learning (RL) to 
learn the clinicians' decisions for AD patients based on the longitude records 
from Electronic Health Records (EHR).
METHODS: In this study, we withdraw 1,736 patients fulfilling our criteria, from 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative(ADNI) database. We focused on 
the two most frequent concomitant diseases, depression, and hypertension, thus 
resulting in five main cohorts, 1) whole data, 2) AD-only, 3) AD-hypertension, 
4) AD-depression, and 5) AD-hypertension-depression. We modeled the treatment 
learning into an RL problem by defining the three factors (i.e., states, action, 
and reward) in RL in multiple strategies, where a regression model and a 
decision tree are developed to generate states, six main medications extracted 
(i.e., no drugs, cholinesterase inhibitors, memantine, hypertension drugs, a 
combination of cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine, and supplements or other 
drugs) are for action, and Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) scores are for reward.
RESULTS: Given the proper dataset, the RL model can generate an optimal policy 
(regimen plan) that outperforms the clinician's treatment regimen. With the 
smallest data samples, the optimal-policy (i.e., policy iteration and 
Q-learning) gained a lesser reward than the clinician's policy (mean -2.68 and 
-2.76 vs . -2.66, respectively), but it gained more reward once the data size 
increased (mean -3.56 and -2.48 vs . -3.57, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results highlight the potential of using RL to generate the 
optimal treatment based on the patients' longitude records. Our work can lead 
the path toward the development of RL-based decision support systems which could 
facilitate the daily practice to manage Alzheimer's disease with comorbidities.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.01.26.23285064
PMCID: PMC9901063
PMID: 36747733


57. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2016;3(3):138-144. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2016.99.

Correlation between Cognition and Function across the Spectrum of Alzheimer's 
Disease.

Liu-Seifert H(1), Siemers E, Selzler K, Sundell K, Aisen P, Cummings J, Raskin 
J, Mohs R.

Author information:
(1)Hong Liu-Seifert, Eli Lilly and Company, Lilly Corporate Center, 
Indianapolis, IN 46285, Liu-seifert_hong@lilly.com, +1 317-433-0662.

BACKGROUND: Both cognitive and functional deterioration are characteristic of 
the clinical progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
OBJECTIVES: To systematically assess correlations between widely used measures 
of cognition and function across the spectrum of AD.
DESIGN: Spearman rank correlations were calculated for cognitive and functional 
measures across datasets from various AD patient populations.
SETTING: Post-hoc analysis from existing databases.
PARTICIPANTS: Pooled data from placebo-treated patients with mild (MMSE score 
≥20 and ≤26) and moderate (MMSE score ≥16 and ≤19) AD dementia from two Phase 3 
solanezumab (EXPEDITION/2) and two semagecesatat (IDENTITY/2) studies and 
normal, late mild cognitive impairment (LMCI) and mild AD patients from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2-Grand Opportunity (ADNI-2/GO). 
Intervention (if any): Placebo (EXPEDITION/2 and IDENTITY/2 subjects).
MEASUREMENTS: Cognitive and functional abilities were measured in all datasets. 
Data were collected at baseline and every three months for 18 months in 
EXPEDITION and IDENTITY studies; and at baseline, 6, 12, and 24 months in the 
ADNI dataset.
RESULTS: The relationship of cognition and function became stronger over time as 
AD patients progressed from preclinical to moderate dementia disease stages, 
with the magnitude of correlations dependent on disease stage and the complexity 
of functional task. The correlations were minimal in the normal control 
population, but became stronger with disease progression.
CONCLUSIONS: This analysis found that measures of cognition and function become 
more strongly correlated with disease progression from preclinical to moderate 
dementia across multiple datasets. These findings improve the understanding of 
the relationship between cognitive and functional clinical measures during the 
course of AD progression and how cognition and function measures relate to each 
other in AD clinical trials.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2016.99
PMID: 29205252

Conflict of interest statement: Drs. Liu-Seifert, Siemers, Selzler, Raskin, and 
Ms. Sundell are employees and minor shareowners of Eli Lilly and Company. Dr. 
Aisen serves on a scientific advisory board for NeuroPhage; has served as a 
consultant to Elan, Wyeth, Eisai, Schering-Plough, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli 
Lilly and Company, NeuroPhage, Merck, Roche, Amgen, Genentech, Abbott, Pfizer, 
Novartis, Bayer, Astellas, Dainippon, Biomarin, Solvay, Otsuka, Daiichi, 
AstraZeneca, Janssen, Medivation, Ichor, Toyama, Lundbeck, Biogen Idec, iPerian, 
Probiodrug, Somaxon, Biotie, Cardeus, Anavex, Kyowa Hakko Kirin Pharma, 
Medtronic; and receives research support from Eli Lilly and Baxter, and the NIH 
[NIA U01-AG10483 (PI), NIA U01-AG024904 (Coordinating Center Director), NIA 
R01-AG030048 (PI), and R01-AG16381 (Co-I)]. Dr. Cummings has provided 
consultation to Acadia, ADAMAS, Anavex, Avanir, Baxter, Boehinger-Ingelheim, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eisai, EnVivo, Genentech, GE Healthcare, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Lilly, Lundbeck, Medavante, Merck, Novartis, Otsuka, Pfizer, Prana, QR Pharma, 
Resverlogix, Roche, Sonexa, Suven, Takeda, and Toyoma. Dr. Mohs is a minor 
shareholder and a retired employee of Eli Lilly and Company.


58. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2022 Dec;227:107191. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2022.107191. Epub 2022 Oct 27.

Brain-on-Cloud for automatic diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease from 3D structural 
magnetic resonance whole-brain scans.

Tomassini S(1), Sbrollini A(2), Covella G(3), Sernani P(4), Falcionelli N(5), 
Müller H(6), Morettini M(7), Burattini L(8), Dragoni AF(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Information Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche (UnivPM), Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
s.tomassini@pm.univpm.it.
(2)Department of Information Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche (UnivPM), Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
a.sbrollini@staff.univpm.it.
(3)Department of Information Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche (UnivPM), Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
g.covella@studenti.univpm.it.
(4)Department of Information Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche (UnivPM), Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
p.sernani@staff.univpm.it.
(5)Department of Information Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche (UnivPM), Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
n.falcionelli@staff.univpm.it.
(6)Information Systems Institute, University of Applied Sciences Western 
Switzerland (HES-SO), Sierre, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
henning.mueller@hevs.ch.
(7)Department of Information Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche (UnivPM), Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
m.morettini@univpm.it.
(8)Department of Information Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche (UnivPM), Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
l.burattini@univpm.it.
(9)Department of Information Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche (UnivPM), Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
a.f.dragoni@univpm.it.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Alzheimer's disease accounts for approximately 70% of 
all dementia cases. Cortical and hippocampal atrophy caused by Alzheimer's 
disease can be appreciated easily from a T1-weighted structural magnetic 
resonance scan. Since a timely therapeutic intervention during the initial 
stages of the syndrome has a positive impact on both disease progression and 
quality of life of affected subjects, Alzheimer's disease diagnosis is crucial. 
Thus, this study relies on the development of a robust yet lightweight 3D 
framework, Brain-on-Cloud, dedicated to efficient learning of Alzheimer's 
disease-related features from 3D structural magnetic resonance whole-brain scans 
by improving our recent convolutional long short-term memory-based framework 
with the integration of a set of data handling techniques in addition to the 
tuning of the model hyper-parameters and the evaluation of its diagnostic 
performance on independent test data.
METHODS: For this objective, four serial experiments were conducted on a 
scalable GPU cloud service. They were compared and the hyper-parameters of the 
best experiment were tuned until reaching the best-performing configuration. In 
parallel, two branches were designed. In the first branch of Brain-on-Cloud, 
training, validation and testing were performed on OASIS-3. In the second 
branch, unenhanced data from ADNI-2 were employed as independent test set, and 
the diagnostic performance of Brain-on-Cloud was evaluated to prove its 
robustness and generalization capability. The prediction scores were computed 
for each subject and stratified according to age, sex and mini mental state 
examination.
RESULTS: In its best guise, Brain-on-Cloud is able to discriminate Alzheimer's 
disease with an accuracy of 92% and 76%, sensitivity of 94% and 82%, and area 
under the curve of 96% and 92% on OASIS-3 and independent ADNI-2 test data, 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Brain-on-Cloud shows to be a reliable, lightweight and 
easily-reproducible framework for automatic diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease 
from 3D structural magnetic resonance whole-brain scans, performing well without 
segmenting the brain into its portions. Preserving the brain anatomy, its 
application and diagnostic ability can be extended to other cognitive disorders. 
Due to its cloud nature, computational lightness and fast execution, it can also 
be applied in real-time diagnostic scenarios providing prompt clinical decision 
support.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2022.107191
PMID: 36335750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
affirm that this manuscript is an honest, accurate and transparent account of 
the study being reported, that no important aspects of the study have been 
omitted, and that any discrepancies from the study as planned (and, if relevant, 
registered) have been explained. The authors declare no relationships with other 
people or organizations that could inappropriately bias the work. The authors 
confirm that neither the manuscript nor any parts of its content are currently 
under consideration or published elsewhere in any language.


59. Cells. 2022 Dec 21;12(1):13. doi: 10.3390/cells12010013.

Association of CSF GAP-43 and APOE ε4 with Cognition in Mild Cognitive 
Impairment and Alzheimer's Disease.

Zhu Y(1), Guo X(2), Zhu F(1), Zhang Q(1)(3), Yang Y(1)(3), For The Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310003, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Tongde Hospital of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou 
310012, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Diagnosis and Treatment of Aging and Physic-Chemical Injury 
Diseases of Zhejiang Province, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310003, China.

The growth-associated protein 43 (GAP-43) is a presynaptic phosphoprotein in 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The ε4 allele of apolipoprotein E (APOE) is an 
important genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD). We aimed to evaluate 
the association of CSF GAP-43 with cognition and whether this correlation was 
related to the APOE ε4 status. We recruited participants from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database, and they were divided into 
cognitively normal (CN) ε4 negative (CN ε4-), CN ε4 positive (CN ε4+), mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) ε4 negative (MCI ε4-), MCI ε4 positive (MCI ε4+), AD 
ε4 negative (AD ε4-), and AD ε4 positive (AD ε4+) groups. Spearman's correlation 
was utilized to evaluate the relationship between CSF GAP-43 and core AD 
biomarkers at the baseline. We performed receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) 
curve analyses to investigate the diagnostic accuracy of CSF GAP-43. The 
correlations between CSF GAP-43 and the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
scores and brain atrophy at baseline were assessed by using multiple linear 
regression, while the association between CSF GAP-43 and MMSE scores at the 
follow-up was tested by performing the generalized estimating equation (GEE). 
The role of CSF GAP-43 in the conversion from MCI to AD was evaluated using the 
Cox proportional hazard model. We found that the CSF GAP-43 level was 
significantly increased in MCI ε4+, AD ε4- and AD ε4+ groups compared with CN 
ε4- or MCI ε4- group. The negative associations between the CSF GAP-43 and MMSE 
scores at the baseline and follow-up were found in MCI ε4- and MCI ε4+ groups. 
In addition, baseline CSF GAP-43 was able to predict the clinical progression 
from MCI to AD. CSF GAP-43 may be a promising biomarker to screen cognition for 
AD. The effects of CSF GAP-43 on cognition were suspected to be relevant to APOE 
ε4 status.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12010013
PMCID: PMC9818551
PMID: 36611808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


60. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2022 Apr 1;77(4):683-688. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/glab313.

A Mixed-Effects Model of Associations Between Interleukin-6 and Hippocampal 
Volume.

Harrell ER(1), Bui C(2), Newman SD(1)(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, USA.
(2)Alabama Life Research Institute, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, 
USA.

Previous studies report hippocampal volume loss can help predict conversion from 
normative aging to mild cognitive impairment to dementia. Additionally, a 
growing literature indicates that stress-related allostatic load may increase 
disease vulnerability. The current study examined the relationship between 
stress-related cytokines (ie, interleukin-6 [IL-6]), cognition as measured by 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores, and hippocampal volume. Mixed 
models were employed to examine both within- (across time) and between-subject 
effects of IL-6 and hippocampal volume on MMSE score among 566 participants from 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). The within-subject 
analysis found left hippocampal volume significantly (p = .009) predicted MMSE 
score. Between-subject analysis found the effect of IL-6 on MMSE was moderated 
by right hippocampal volume (p = .001). These results replicate previous 
findings and also extend prior work demonstrating stress-related cytokines may 
play a role in Alzheimer's disease progression.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glab313
PMCID: PMC8974327
PMID: 34637514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Neuroimage. 2021 Feb 15;227:117646. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117646. Epub 
2020 Dec 16.

Analyzing the effect of APOE on Alzheimer's disease progression using an 
event-based model for stratified populations.

Venkatraghavan V(1), Klein S(2), Fani L(3), Ham LS(2), Vrooman H(2), Ikram 
MK(4), Niessen WJ(5), Bron EE(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Department of Radiology & Nuclear 
Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, the Netherlands. 
Electronic address: v.venkatraghavan@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Department of Radiology & Nuclear 
Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands; Department of Neurology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Department of Radiology & Nuclear 
Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, the Netherlands; 
Quantitative Imaging Group, Dept. of Imaging Physics, Faculty of Applied 
Sciences, Delft University of Technology, Delft, the Netherlands.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia and is 
phenotypically heterogeneous. APOE is a triallelic gene which correlates with 
phenotypic heterogeneity in AD. In this work, we determined the effect of APOE 
alleles on the disease progression timeline of AD using a discriminative 
event-based model (DEBM). Since DEBM is a data-driven model, stratification into 
smaller disease subgroups would lead to more inaccurate models as compared to 
fitting the model on the entire dataset. Hence our secondary aim is to propose 
and evaluate novel approaches in which we split the different steps of DEBM into 
group-aspecific and group-specific parts, where the entire dataset is used to 
train the group-aspecific parts and only the data from a specific group is used 
to train the group-specific parts of the DEBM. We performed simulation 
experiments to benchmark the accuracy of the proposed approaches and to select 
the optimal approach. Subsequently, the chosen approach was applied to the 
baseline data of 417 cognitively normal, 235 mild cognitively impaired who 
convert to AD within 3 years, and 342 AD patients from the Alzheimers Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset to gain new insights into the effect of 
APOE carriership on the disease progression timeline of AD. In the ε4 carrier 
group, the model predicted with high confidence that CSF Amyloidβ42 and the 
cognitive score of Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS) are early 
biomarkers. Hippocampus was the earliest volumetric biomarker to become 
abnormal, closely followed by the CSF Phosphorylated Tau181 (PTAU) biomarker. In 
the homozygous ε3 carrier group, the model predicted a similar ordering among 
CSF biomarkers. However, the volume of the fusiform gyrus was identified as one 
of the earliest volumetric biomarker. While the findings in the ε4 carrier and 
the homozygous ε3 carrier groups fit the current understanding of progression of 
AD, the finding in the ε2 carrier group did not. The model predicted, with 
relatively low confidence, CSF Neurogranin as one of the earliest biomarkers 
along with cognitive score of Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). Amyloid β42 
was found to become abnormal after PTAU. The presented models could aid 
understanding of the disease, and in selecting homogeneous group of 
presymptomatic subjects at-risk of developing symptoms for clinical trials.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117646
PMID: 33338617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2023 Dec;38(12):e6037. doi: 10.1002/gps.6037.

Racial differences in the effect of APOE-ε4 genotypes on trail making test B in 
Alzheimer's disease: A longitudinal study.

Xu C(1), Acevedo P(1), Lu Y(2), Su BB(3), Ozuna K(1), Padilla V(1), Karithara 
A(1), Mao C(1), Navia RO(4), Piamjariyakul U(5), Wang K(5); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health and Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Professions, 
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, Brownsville, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, 
Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics - Allergy and Immunology, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine and Rockefeller Neuroscience Institute, West Virginia 
University, Morgantown, West Virginia, USA.
(5)School of Nursing, Health Sciences Center, West Virginia University, 
Morgantown, West Virginia, USA.

OBJECTIVES: The trail making test part B (TMT-B) evaluates executive functions, 
memory, and sensorimotor functions. No previous study was found to examine the 
longitudinal effect of APOE-ε4 genotypes on the TMT-B scores in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) across racial groups.
METHODS: This study used the data from Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI): 382 participants with AD, 503 with cognitive normal (CN), 
1293 with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) at baseline and follow-up of four 
years. The multivariable linear mixed model was used to investigate the effect 
of APOE-ε4 genotypes on changes in TMT-B scores.
RESULTS: Compared with Whites, African Americans (AA) and Hispanics had higher 
TMT-B scores (poor cognitive function). Furthermore, Whites subjects with 1 or 2 
APOE-ε4 alleles had significantly higher TMT-B scores compared with individuals 
without APOE-ε4 allele at baseline and four follow-up visits; however, no 
differences in TMT-B were found between APOE-ε4 alleles in the Hispanic and AA 
groups. No APOE-ε4 by visit interactions was found for 3 racial groups. 
Stratified by AD diagnosis, the APOE-ε4 allele was associated with TMT-B scores 
only in the MCI group, while there were significant interactions for visit by 
education, APOE-ε4 allele, and the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) score in 
the MCI group. In addition, TMT-B was significantly correlated with the MMSE, AD 
Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale 13 (ADAS13), tTau, pTau, Aβ42, and 
hippocampus.
CONCLUSIONS: APOE-ɛ4 allele is associated with TMT-B scores in Whites subjects, 
but not in the Hispanic and AA groups. APOE-ε4 showed interaction with visit in 
the MCI group.

© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.6037
PMID: 38100638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Eur Radiol. 2022 Oct;32(10):6965-6976. doi: 10.1007/s00330-022-09081-y. Epub 
2022 Aug 24.

How segmentation methods affect hippocampal radiomic feature accuracy in 
Alzheimer's disease analysis?

Zheng Q(1), Zhang Y(2), Li H(3), Tong X(2), Ouyang M(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer and Control Engineering, Yantai University, No30, Qingquan 
Road, Laishan District, Yantai, 264005, Shandong, China. zhengqiang@ytu.edu.cn.
(2)School of Computer and Control Engineering, Yantai University, No30, Qingquan 
Road, Laishan District, Yantai, 264005, Shandong, China.
(3)Departments of Medical Oncology and Radiology, Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding 
Hospital of Qingdao University Medical College, Yantai, 264000, China.
(4)Department of Radiology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
PA, 19104, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Hippocampal radiomic features (HRFs) can serve as biomarkers in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, how different hippocampal segmentation 
methods affect HRFs in AD is still unknown. The aim of the study was to 
investigate how different segmentation methods affect HRF accuracy in AD 
analysis.
METHODS: A total of 1650 subjects were identified from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative database (ADNI). The mini-mental state examination 
(MMSE) and Alzheimer's disease assessment scale (ADAS-cog13) were also adopted. 
After calculating the HRFs of intensity, shape, and textural features from each 
side of the hippocampus in structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI), the 
consistency of HRFs calculated from 7 different hippocampal segmentation methods 
was validated, and the performance of machine learning-based classification of 
AD vs. normal control (NC) adopting the different HRFs was also examined. 
Additional 571 subjects from the European DTI Study on Dementia database (EDSD) 
were to validate the consistency of results.
RESULTS: Between different segmentations, HRFs showed a high measurement 
consistency (R > 0.7), a high significant consistency between NC, mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), and AD (T-value plot, R > 0.8), and consistent significant 
correlations between HRFs and MMSE/ADAS-cog13 (p < 0.05). The best NC vs. AD 
classification was obtained when the hippocampus was sufficiently segmented by 
primitive majority voting (threshold = 0.2). High consistent results were 
reproduced from independent EDSD cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: HRFs exhibited high consistency across different hippocampal 
segmentation methods, and the best performance in AD classification was obtained 
when HRFs were extracted by the naïve majority voting method with a more 
sufficient segmentation and relatively low hippocampus segmentation accuracy.
KEY POINTS: • The hippocampal radiomic features exhibited high 
measurement/statistical/clinical consistency across different hippocampal 
segmentation methods. • The best performance in AD classification was obtained 
when hippocampal radiomics were extracted by the naïve majority voting method 
with a more sufficient segmentation and relatively low hippocampus segmentation 
accuracy.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to European Society of Radiology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00330-022-09081-y
PMID: 35999372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2023 Jan;10(1):18-31. doi: 10.1002/acn3.51695. Epub 2022 
Dec 14.

Plasma phosphorylated tau181 predicts cognitive and functional decline.

Tropea TF(1), Waligorska T(2), Xie SX(3), Nasrallah IM(4), Cousins KAQ(1), 
Trojanowski JQ(2), Grossman M(1), Irwin DJ(1), Weintraub D(5)(6), Lee EB(2), 
Wolk DA(1), Chen-Plotkin AS(1), Shaw LM(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Parkinson's Disease Research, Education and Clinical Center (PADRECC), 
Philadelphia Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine if plasma tau phosphorylated at threonine 181 (p-tau181) 
distinguishes pathology-confirmed Alzheimer's disease (AD) from normal cognition 
(NC) adults, to test if p-tau181 predicts cognitive and functional decline, and 
to validate findings in an external cohort.
METHODS: Thirty-one neuropathology-confirmed AD cases, participants with 
clinical diagnoses of mild cognitive impairment (MCI, N = 91) or AD dementia 
(N = 64), and NC (N = 241) had plasma collected at study entry. The clinical 
diagnosis groups had annual cognitive (Mini-Mental State Examination, MMSE) and 
functional (Clinical Dementia Rating Scale, CDR) measures. NC (N = 70), MCI 
(N = 75), and AD dementia (N = 50) cases from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) were used as a validation cohort. Plasma p-tau181 
was measured using the Quanterix SiMoA HD-X platform.
RESULTS: Plasma p-tau181 differentiated pathology-confirmed AD from NC with 
negative amyloid PET scans with an AUC of 0.93. A cut point of 3.44 pg/mL 
(maximum Youden Index) had a sensitivity of 0.77, specificity of 0.96. p-Tau181 
values above the cut point were associated with the faster rate of decline in 
MMSE in AD dementia and MCI and a shorter time to a clinically significant 
functional decline in all groups. In a subset of MCI cases from ADNI, p-tau181 
values above the cut point associated with faster rate of decline in MMSE, and a 
shorter time to a clinically significant functional decline and conversion to 
dementia.
INTERPRETATION: Plasma p-tau181 differentiates AD pathology cases from NC with 
high accuracy. Higher levels of plasma p-tau181 are associated with faster 
cognitive and functional decline.

© 2022 The Authors. Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/acn3.51695
PMCID: PMC9852389
PMID: 36518085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest.


65. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Oct 28:2024.10.27.24316215. doi: 
10.1101/2024.10.27.24316215.

Prediction, prognosis and monitoring of neurodegeneration at biobank-scale via 
machine learning and imaging.

Dadu A(1)(2)(3), Ta M(2)(3), Tustison NJ(4), Daneshmand A(5), Marek K(6), 
Singleton AB(2)(7), Campbell RH(1), Nalls MA(2)(3)(7), Iwaki H(2)(3)(7), Avants 
B(4)(6), Faghri F(2)(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
Champaign, IL, 61820, USA.
(2)Center for Alzheimer's and Related Dementias, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(3)DataTecnica, Washington, DC, 20812, USA.
(4)University of Virginia, Dept of Radiology and Medical Imaging, 
Charlottesville, VA, 22903, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Boston Medical Center, Boston University School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA, 02118, USA.
(6)InviCRO LLC, Boston, Massachusetts.
(7)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease and related dementias (ADRD) and Parkinson's 
disease (PD) are the most common neurodegenerative conditions. These central 
nervous system disorders impact both the structure and function of the brain and 
may lead to imaging changes that precede symptoms. Patients with ADRD or PD have 
long asymptomatic phases that exhibit significant heterogeneity. Hence, 
quantitative measures that can provide early disease indicators are necessary to 
improve patient stratification, clinical care, and clinical trial design. This 
work uses machine learning techniques to derive such a quantitative marker from 
T1-weighted (T1w) brain Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
METHODS: In this retrospective study, we developed machine learning (ML) based 
disease-specific scores based on T1w brain MRI utilizing Parkinson's Disease 
Progression Marker Initiative (PPMI) and Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) cohorts. We evaluated the potential of ML-based scores for 
early diagnosis, prognosis, and monitoring of ADRD and PD in an independent 
large-scale population-based longitudinal cohort, UK Biobank.
FINDINGS: 1,826 dementia images from 731 participants, 3,161 healthy control 
images from 925 participants from the ADNI cohort, 684 PD images from 319 
participants, and 232 healthy control images from 145 participants from the PPMI 
cohort were used to train machine learning models. The classification 
performance is 0.94 [95% CI: 0.93-0.96] area under the ROC Curve (AUC) for ADRD 
detection and 0.63 [95% CI: 0.57-0.71] for PD detection using 790 extracted 
structural brain features. The most predictive regions include the hippocampus 
and temporal brain regions in ADRD and the substantia nigra in PD. The 
normalized ML model's probabilistic output (ADRD and PD imaging scores) was 
evaluated on 42,835 participants with imaging data from the UK Biobank. There 
are 66 cases for ADRD and 40 PD cases whose T1 brain MRI is available during 
pre-diagnostic phases. For diagnosis occurrence events within 5 years, the 
integrated survival model achieves a time-dependent AUC of 0.86 [95% CI: 
0.80-0.92] for dementia and 0.89 [95% CI: 0.85-0.94] for PD. ADRD imaging score 
is strongly associated with dementia-free survival (hazard ratio (HR) 1.76 [95% 
CI: 1.50-2.05] per S.D. of imaging score), and PD imaging score shows 
association with PD-free survival (hazard ratio 2.33 [95% CI: 1.55-3.50]) in our 
integrated model. HR and prevalence increased stepwise over imaging score 
quartiles for PD, demonstrating heterogeneity. As a proxy for diagnosis, we 
validated AD/PD polygenic risk scores of 42,835 subjects against the imaging 
scores, showing a highly significant association after adjusting for covariates. 
In both the PPMI and ADNI cohorts, the scores are associated with clinical 
assessments, including the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog), and pathological 
markers, which include amyloid and tau. Finally, imaging scores are associated 
with polygenic risk scores for multiple diseases. Our results suggest that we 
can use imaging scores to assess the genetic architecture of such disorders in 
the future.
INTERPRETATION: Our study demonstrates the use of quantitative markers generated 
using machine learning techniques for ADRD and PD. We show that disease 
probability scores obtained from brain structural features are useful for early 
detection, prognosis prediction, and monitoring disease progression. To 
facilitate community engagement and external tests of model utility, an 
interactive app to explore summary level data from this study and dive into 
external data can be found here https://ndds-brainimaging-ml.streamlit.app. As 
far as we know, this is the first publicly available cloud-based MRI prediction 
application.
FUNDING: US National Institute on Aging, and US National Institutes of Health.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.10.27.24316215
PMCID: PMC11581077
PMID: 39574848

Conflict of interest statement: A.D., M.T., M.A.N., H.I., and F.F. declare the 
following competing financial interests, as their participation in this project 
was part of a competitive contract awarded to Data Tecnica International, LLC, 
by the NIH to support open science research. M.A.N. also currently serves on the 
scientific advisory board for Character Bio and is an advisor to Neuron23, Inc. 
B.A. are employees of REALM IDx. The study’s funders had no role in the study 
design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the 
report. All authors and the public can access all data and statistical 
programming code used in this project for the analyses and results generation. 
F.F. takes final responsibility for the decision to submit the paper for 
publication.


66. Neurodegener Dis. 2020;20(4):153-164. doi: 10.1159/000515322. Epub 2021 Mar 31.

Brain Atrophy Subtypes and the ATN Classification Scheme in Alzheimer's Disease.

Cedres N(1), Ekman U(1), Poulakis K(1), Shams S(1)(2)(3), Cavallin L(1)(2)(3), 
Muehlboeck S(1), Granberg T(1)(2)(3), Wahlund LO(1), Ferreira D(1), Westman 
E(1)(4); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Geriatrics, Department of Neurobiology, Karolinska 
Institutet, Center for Alzheimer Research, Care Sciences, and Society, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Neuroradiology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(4)Department of Neuroimaging, Institute of Psychiatry, Centre for Neuroimaging 
Sciences, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: We investigated the association between atrophy subtypes of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), the ATN classification scheme, and key demographic and 
clinical factors in 2 cohorts with different source characteristics (a highly 
selective research-oriented cohort, the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative [ADNI]; and a naturalistic heterogeneous clinically oriented cohort, 
Karolinska Imaging Dementia Study [KIDS]).
METHODS: A total of 382 AD patients were included. Factorial analysis of mixed 
data was used to investigate associations between AD subtypes based on brain 
atrophy patterns, ATN profiles based on cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers, and age, 
sex, Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), cerebrovascular disease (burden of 
white matter signal abnormalities, WMSAs), and APOE genotype.
RESULTS: Older patients with high WMSA burden, belonging to the typical AD 
subtype and showing A+T+N+ or A+T+N- profiles clustered together and were mainly 
from ADNI. Younger patients with low WMSA burden, limbic-predominant or minimal 
atrophy AD subtypes, and A+T-N- or A+T-N+ profiles clustered together and were 
mainly from KIDS. APOE ε4 carriers more frequently showed the A+T-N- and A+T+N- 
profiles.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings align with the recent framework for biological 
subtypes of AD: the combination of risk factors, protective factors, and brain 
pathologies determines belonging of AD patients to distinct subtypes.

© 2021 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000515322
PMID: 33789287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. PLoS One. 2019 Feb 14;14(2):e0211558. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0211558. 
eCollection 2019.

Random forest prediction of Alzheimer's disease using pairwise selection from 
time series data.

Moore PJ(1), Lyons TJ(1), Gallacher J(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Time-dependent data collected in studies of Alzheimer's disease usually has 
missing and irregularly sampled data points. For this reason time series methods 
which assume regular sampling cannot be applied directly to the data without a 
pre-processing step. In this paper we use a random forest to learn the 
relationship between pairs of data points at different time separations. The 
input vector is a summary of the time series history and it includes both 
demographic and non-time varying variables such as genetic data. To test the 
method we use data from the TADPOLE grand challenge, an initiative which aims to 
predict the evolution of subjects at risk of Alzheimer's disease using 
demographic, physical and cognitive input data. The task is to predict 
diagnosis, ADAS-13 score and normalised ventricles volume. While the competition 
proceeds, forecasting methods may be compared using a leaderboard dataset 
selected from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and with 
standard metrics for measuring accuracy. For diagnosis, we find an mAUC of 0.82, 
and a classification accuracy of 0.73 compared with a benchmark SVM predictor 
which gives mAUC = 0.62 and BCA = 0.52. The results show that the method is 
effective and comparable with other methods.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0211558
PMCID: PMC6375557
PMID: 30763336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PM and JG received funding from the UK Medical 
Research Council (MRC) Dementias Platform, UK. The Dementias Platform is a 
multi-million pound public-private partnership, developed and led by the MRC, to 
accelerate progress in and open up dementias research. This does not alter our 
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


68. J Alzheimers Dis. 2023;96(4):1739-1746. doi: 10.3233/JAD-230687.

Elevated Homocysteine Levels and Hypertension Relate to Cognitive Impairment via 
Increased White Matter Hyperintensity Volume.

Gao Y(1)(2), Duan X(2), Li W(1), Zhang X(1), Xian X(3), Zhu Y(4), Wang H(4); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Hebei Medical University, 
Brain Aging and Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory of Hebei Province, 
Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, 
China.
(3)Department of Pathophysiology, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, 
China.
(4)Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine 
Geriatrics Department, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have identified a relationship between elevated 
homocysteine levels and hypertension (HTN) with Alzheimer's disease (AD), but 
its pathogenesis remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate elevated homocysteine levels and HTN as risk factors for 
cognitive impairment (CI) and determine their relationship with white matter 
hyperintensity (WMH) volume.
METHODS: A total of 521 subjects were selected from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database and divided into two groups according to 
the diagnostic criteria of the ADNI database. The CI group included 370 
subjects, consisting of 122 with AD and 248 with mild CI, while the cognitively 
normal (CN) group contained 151 subjects. The history of HTN, homocysteine 
levels, WMH volume and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores were 
analyzed.
RESULTS: The study found that patients with CI had higher homocysteine levels 
than those with CN. Additionally, WMH volume was significantly correlated with 
homocysteine levels in CI patients, and MMSE scores decreased as WMH volume 
increased. Further analysis revealed that CI patients with HTN had significantly 
higher homocysteine levels than those without HTN. Furthermore, the correlation 
between WMH volume and homocysteine levels was significant only in CI patients 
with HTN and not in those without HTN. In CN patients, there was no correlation 
between WMH volume and homocysteine levels in either the HTN or non-HTN groups, 
and no difference was observed in homocysteine levels.
CONCLUSIONS: It is indicated that elevated homocysteine levels in conjunction 
with HTN are associated with the increased volume of WMHs and CI.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-230687
PMID: 38007660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Alzheimers Dis. 2016;50(1):271-82. doi: 10.3233/JAD-150563.

Empirically Defining Trajectories of Late-Life Cognitive and Functional Decline.

Hochstetler H(1), Trzepacz PT(2), Wang S(1), Yu P(1), Case M(1), Henley 
DB(1)(2)(3), Degenhardt E(3), Leoutsakos JM(4), Lyketsos CG(4).

Author information:
(1)Eli Lilly and Company or a Wholly Owned subsidiary, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(2)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(3)Indiana University Physician Group, Indiana University Health, Indianapolis, 
IN, USA.
(4)Johns Hopkins University and Johns Hopkins Bayview, Baltimore, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is associated with variable cognitive and 
functional decline, and it is difficult to predict who will develop the disease 
and how they will progress.
OBJECTIVE: This exploratory study aimed to define latent classes from 
participants in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database 
who had similar growth patterns of both cognitive and functional change using 
Growth Mixture Modeling (GMM), identify characteristics associated with those 
trajectories, and develop a decision tree using clinical predictors to determine 
which trajectory, as determined by GMM, individuals will most likely follow.
METHODS: We used ADNI early mild cognitive impairment (EMCI), late MCI (LMCI), 
AD dementia, and healthy control (HC) participants with known amyloid-β status 
and follow-up assessments on the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale - 
Cognitive Subscale or the Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ) up to 24 
months postbaseline. GMM defined trajectories. Classification and Regression 
Tree (CART) used certain baseline variables to predict likely trajectory path.
RESULTS: GMM identified three trajectory classes (C): C1 (n = 162, 13.6%) 
highest baseline impairment and steepest pattern of cognitive/functional 
decline; C3 (n = 819, 68.7%) lowest baseline impairment and minimal change on 
both; C2 (n = 211, 17.7%) intermediate pattern, worsening on both, but less 
steep than C1. C3 had fewer amyloid- or apolipoprotein-E ɛ4 (APOE4) positive and 
more healthy controls (HC) or EMCI cases. CART analysis identified two decision 
nodes using the FAQ to predict likely class with 82.3% estimated accuracy.
CONCLUSIONS: Cognitive/functional change followed three trajectories with 
greater baseline impairment and amyloid and APOE4 positivity associated with 
greater progression. FAQ may predict trajectory class.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-150563
PMCID: PMC4927844
PMID: 26639960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Sci Rep. 2024 Nov 10;14(1):27472. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-78712-9.

Exploring the relationship among Alzheimer's disease, aging and cognitive scores 
through neuroimaging-based approach.

Sun J(1), Han JJ(2), Chen W(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Qufu Normal University, Qufu, 
273165, People's Republic of China.
(2)Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced 
Interdisciplinary Studies, Center for Quantitative Biology (CQB), Peking 
University, Beijing, 100871, People's Republic of China. jackie.han@pku.edu.cn.
(3)School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Qufu Normal University, Qufu, 
273165, People's Republic of China. chenweiyang@qfnu.edu.cn.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder, with the 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) serving 
significant roles in monitoring its progression. We hypothesize that while 
cognitive assessment scores can detect AD-related brain changes, the targeted 
brain regions may differ. Additionally, given AD's strong association with 
aging, we propose that specific brain regions are influenced by both AD 
pathology and aging, exhibiting strong correlations with both. To test these 
hypotheses, we developed a 3D convolutional network with a mixed-attention 
mechanism to recognize AD subjects from structural magnetic resonance imaging 
(sMRI) data and utilize 3D convolutional methods to pinpoint brain regions 
significantly correlated with the AD, MMSE, CDR and age. All models were trained 
and internally validated on 417 samples from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), and the classification model was externally 
validated on 382 samples from the Australian Imaging and Lifestyle flagship 
(AIBL). This approach provided robust support for using MMSE and CDR in 
assessing AD progression and visually illustrated the relationship between aging 
and AD. The analysis revealed correlations among the four identification tasks 
(AD, MMSE, CDR and age) and highlighted asymmetric brain lesions in both AD and 
aging. Notably, we found that AD can accelerate aging to some extent, and a 
significant correlation exists between the rate of aging and cognitive 
assessment scores. This offers new insights into the relationship between AD and 
aging.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-78712-9
PMCID: PMC11551169
PMID: 39523370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Competing interests The authors 
declare no competing interests.


71. Front Neurosci. 2019 May 15;13:455. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2019.00455. eCollection 
2019.

TREML2 Mutation Mediate Alzheimer's Disease Risk by Altering Neuronal 
Degeneration.

Song YN(1), Li JQ(1), Tan CC(1), Wang HF(1), Tan MS(1), Cao XP(2), Yu JT(1)(2), 
Tan L(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(2)Clinical Research Center, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.

A coding missense mutation (rs3747742) in triggering receptor expressed on 
myeloid cell-like 2 (TREML2) has been recently proposed as an important 
protective factor against Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the link between 
TREML2 and AD pathology remains unclear. Therefore, we explored the association 
of TREML2 rs3747742 with cognitive function, neuroimaging biomarkers and 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers related to AD, including CSF total-tau 
(T-tau), phosphor-tau (P-tau), and amyloid-β (Aβ1-42). As for cognitive 
function, related cognitive scores of Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes 
(CDRSB), Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive section 11 (ADAS-cog 
11), Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), and Rey Auditory-Verbal Learning Test 
(RAVLT) were extracted. We used a multiple linear regression model to examine 
the association of TREML2 rs3747742 with the baseline variables. Furthermore, we 
also calculated the change rate of above variables influenced by TREML2 
rs3747742 via applying a mixed-effects model over a 4-year follow-up. In this 
analysis, a total of 1,306 individuals from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) database were included. Finally, we observed that only in AD 
patients, but not in normal controls or mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
individuals, TREML2 rs3747742 exhibited a strong association with CSF total-tau 
levels at baseline (β = -22.1210, p = 0.0166) and 4-year follow-up (β = -0.3961, 
p = 0.0115). Furthermore, no associations were found with CSF Aβ1-42 levels, 
P-tau levels, neuroimaging biomarkers and cognitive function neither for 
baseline variables nor for longitudinal data. Thus, this study indicated that 
TREML2 mediated the risk of AD through influencing AD-related neurodegeneration 
(abnormal T-tau levels) but not P-tau levels and Aβ pathology.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2019.00455
PMCID: PMC6529571
PMID: 31156362


72. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2020 Apr;187:105290. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.105290. Epub 2019 Dec 24.

Region-of-Interest based sparse feature learning method for Alzheimer's disease 
identification.

Wang L(1), Liu Y(2), Zeng X(3), Cheng H(1), Wang Z(4), Wang Q(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Robotics, University of Electronic Science and Technology of 
China, Chengdu, 611731 China.
(2)School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, 100049 China. Electronic address: yanliu@ucas.ac.cn.
(3)Department of Radiology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, 100191 
China. Electronic address: xiangzhuzeng@126.com.
(4)Department of Radiology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, 100191 
China.
(5)Beijing Union University, Beijing, 100101 China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: In recent years, some clinical parameters, such as the 
volume of gray matter (GM) and cortical thickness, have been used as anatomical 
features to identify Alzheimer's disease (AD) from Healthy Controls (HC) in some 
feature-based machine learning methods. However, fewer image-based feature 
parameters have been proposed, which are equivalent to these clinical 
parameters, to describe the atrophy of regions-of-interest (ROIs) of the brain. 
In this study, we aim to extract effective image-based feature parameters to 
improve the diagnostic performance of AD with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
data.
METHODS: A new subspace-based sparse feature learning method is proposed, which 
builds a union-of-subspace representation model to realize feature extraction 
and disease identification. Specifically, the proposed method estimates feature 
dimensions reasonably, at the same time, it protects local features for the 
specified ROIs of the brain, and realizes image-based feature extraction and 
classification automatically instead of computing the volume of GM or cortical 
thickness preliminarily.
RESULTS: Experimental results illustrate the effectiveness and robustness of the 
proposed method on feature extraction and classification, which are based on the 
sampled clinical dataset from Peking University Third Hospital of China and the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset. The extracted 
image-based feature parameters describe the atrophy of ROIs of the brain well as 
clinical parameters but show better performance in AD identification than 
clinical parameters. Based on them, the important ROIs for AD identification can 
be identified even for correlated variables.
CONCLUSION: The extracted features and the proposed identification parameters 
show high correlation with the volume of GM and the clinical mini-mental state 
examination (MMSE) score respectively. The proposed method will be useful in 
denoting the changes of cerebral pathology and cognitive function in AD 
patients.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.105290
PMID: 31927305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Neurobiol Aging. 2022 May;113:73-83. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.12.015. 
Epub 2022 Feb 23.

SimulAD: a dynamical model for personalized simulation and disease staging in 
Alzheimer's disease.

Clément AN(1), Ribaldi F(2), Frisoni GB(2), Garibotto V(3), Robert P(4), Ayache 
N(5), Lorenzi M(5).

Author information:
(1)Université Côte d'Azur, Inria Sophia Antipolis, Epione Research Project, 
Sophia-Antipolis, France. Electronic address: clement.abi-nader@inria.fr.
(2)Memory Clinic and LANVIE-Laboratory of Neuroimaging of Aging, Hospitals and 
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Geneva University, Geneva, Switzerland; Nuclear 
Medicine, Geneva University, Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Université Côte d'Azur, CoBTeK lab, MNC3 Program, Nice, France.
(5)Université Côte d'Azur, Inria Sophia Antipolis, Epione Research Project, 
Sophia-Antipolis, France.

SimulAD is a computational disease progression model (DPM) originally developed 
on the ADNI database to simulate the evolution of clinical and imaging markers 
characteristic of AD, and to quantify the disease severity (DS) of a subject. In 
this work, we assessed the validity of this estimated DS, as well as the 
generalization of the DPM., by applying SimulAD on a new cohort from the Geneva 
Memory Center (GMC). The differences between the estimated DS of healthy, mild 
cognitive impairment and AD dementia groups were statistically significant 
(p-values < 0.05; d ≥ 0.8). DS correlated with MMSE (ρ = -0.55), hippocampal 
atrophy (ρ = -0.62), glucose hypometabolism (ρ = -0.67), amyloid burden (ρ = 
0.31) and tau deposition (ρ = 0.62) (p-values < 0.01). Based on the dynamics 
estimated on the ADNI cohort, we simulated a DPM for the subjects of the GMC 
cohort. The difference between the temporal evolution of similar biomarkers 
simulated on the ADNI and GMC cohorts remained below 10%. This study illustrates 
the robustness and good generalization of SimulAD, highlighting its potential 
for clinical and pharmaceutical studies.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.12.015
PMID: 35320737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Neurology. 2019 Jul 23;93(4):e334-e346. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000007821. Epub 
2019 Jul 2.

Cognitive reserve and clinical progression in Alzheimer disease: A paradoxical 
relationship.

van Loenhoud AC(1), van der Flier WM(2), Wink AM(2), Dicks E(2), Groot C(2), 
Twisk J(2), Barkhof F(2), Scheltens P(2), Ossenkoppele R(2); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)From Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology (A.C.v.L., 
W.M.v.d.F., E.D., C.G., P.S., R.O.), and Department of Radiology and Nuclear 
Medicine (A.M.W., F.B., R.O.), Amsterdam Neuroscience, and Department of 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics (W.M.v.d.F., J.T.), Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam UMC, the Netherlands; Institutes of Neurology and Healthcare 
Engineering (F.B.), University College London, UK; and Clinical Memory Research 
Unit (R.O.), Lund University, Sweden. a.vanloenhoud@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)From Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology (A.C.v.L., 
W.M.v.d.F., E.D., C.G., P.S., R.O.), and Department of Radiology and Nuclear 
Medicine (A.M.W., F.B., R.O.), Amsterdam Neuroscience, and Department of 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics (W.M.v.d.F., J.T.), Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam UMC, the Netherlands; Institutes of Neurology and Healthcare 
Engineering (F.B.), University College London, UK; and Clinical Memory Research 
Unit (R.O.), Lund University, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between cognitive reserve (CR) and 
clinical progression across the Alzheimer disease (AD) spectrum.
METHODS: We selected 839 β-amyloid (Aβ)-positive participants with normal 
cognition (NC, n = 175), mild cognitive impairment (MCI, n = 437), or AD 
dementia (n = 227) from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). 
CR was quantified using standardized residuals (W scores) from a 
(covariate-adjusted) linear regression with global cognition (13-item 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale) as an independent 
variable of interest, and either gray matter volumes or white matter 
hyperintensity volume as dependent variables. These W scores, reflecting whether 
an individual's degree of cerebral damage is lower or higher than clinically 
expected, were tested as predictors of diagnostic conversion (i.e., NC to MCI/AD 
dementia, or MCI to AD dementia) and longitudinal changes in memory (ADNI-MEM) 
and executive functions (ADNI-EF).
RESULTS: The median follow-up period was 24 months (interquartile range 6-42). 
Corrected for age, sex, APOE4 status, and baseline cerebral damage, higher gray 
matter volume-based W scores (i.e., greater CR) were associated with a lower 
diagnostic conversion risk (hazard ratio [HR] 0.22, p < 0.001) and slower 
decline in memory (β = 0.48, p < 0.001) and executive function (β = 0.67, p < 
0.001). Stratified by disease stage, we found similar results for NC (diagnostic 
conversion: HR 0.30, p = 0.038; ADNI-MEM: β = 0.52, p = 0.028; ADNI-EF: β = 
0.42, p = 0.077) and MCI (diagnostic conversion: HR 0.21, p < 0.001; ADNI-MEM: β 
= 0.43, p = 0.003; ADNI-EF: β = 0.59, p < 0.001), but opposite findings (i.e., 
more rapid decline) for AD dementia (ADNI-MEM: β = -0.91, p = 0.002; ADNI-EF: β 
= -0.77, p = 0.081).
CONCLUSIONS: Among Aβ-positive individuals, greater CR related to attenuated 
clinical progression in predementia stages of AD, but accelerated cognitive 
decline after the onset of dementia.

Copyright © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000007821
PMCID: PMC6669930
PMID: 31266904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. BMC Geriatr. 2023 Jul 31;23(1):462. doi: 10.1186/s12877-023-04175-8.

Prognostic relevance of gait-related cognitive functions for dementia conversion 
in amnestic mild cognitive impairment.

Tuena C(1), Maestri S(2), Serino S(3), Pedroli E(2)(4), Stramba-Badiale M(5), 
Riva G(2)(6); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Silbert LC, Lind B, Crissey R, Kaye JA, Carter R, Dolen S, Quinn 
J, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Becerra M, Teodoro L, Dagerman K, Spann BM, Brewer 
J, Fleisher A, Vanderswag H, Ziolkowski J, Heidebrink JL, Zbizek-Nulph L, Lord 
JL, Albers CS, Petersen R, Mason SS, Knopman D, Johnson K, Villanueva-Meyer J, 
Pavlik V, Pacini N, Lamb A, Kass JS, Doody RS, Shibley V, Chowdhury M, Rountree 
S, Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Mintz A, Ances B, Morris JC, Winkfield D, Carroll 
M, Stobbs-Cucchi G, Oliver A, Creech ML, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Geldmacher D, 
Love MN, Griffith R, Clark D, Brockington J, Marson D, Grossman H, Goldstein MA, 
Greenberg J, Mitsis E, Shah RC, Lamar M, Samuels P, Duara R, Greig-Custo MT, 
Rodriguez R, Albert M, Onyike C, Farrington L, Rudow S, Brichko R, Kielb S, 
Smith A, Raj BA, Fargher K, Sadowski M, Wisniewski T, Shulman M, Faustin A, Rao 
J, Castro KM, Ulysse A, Chen S, Doraiswamy PM, Petrella JR, James O, Wong TZ, 
Borges-Neto S, Karlawish JH, Wolk DA, Vaishnavi S, Clark CM, Arnold SE, Smith 
CD, Jicha GA, Khouli RE, Raslau FD, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, Porsteinsson 
AP, Martin K, Kowalski N, Keltz M, Goldstein BS, Makino KM, Ismail MS, Brand C, 
Thai G, Pierce A, Yanez B, Sosa E, Witbracht M, Kelley B, Nguyen T, Womack K, 
Mathews D, Quiceno M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, Hajjar I, Burns JM, Swerdlow RH, Brooks 
WM, Silverman DHS, Kremen S, Apostolova L, Tingus K, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, Woo E, 
Teng E, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Poki-Walker K, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews 
BR, Brosch JR, Herring S, van Dyck CH, Mecca AP, Good SP, MacAvoy MG, Carson RE, 
Varma P, Chertkow H, Vaitekunas S, Hosein C, Black S, Stefanovic B, Heyn C, 
Hsiung GR, Kim E, Mudge B, Sossi V, Feldman H, Assaly M, Finger E, Pasternak S, 
Rachinsky I, Kertesz A, Drost D, Rogers J, Grant I, Muse B, Rogalski E, Robson 
J, Mesulam MM, Kerwin D, Wu CK, Johnson N, Lipowski K, Weintraub S, Bonakdarpour 
B, Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Weiner MW, Perry D, 
Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, MCCann K, Poe J, Marshall GA, Sperling RA, 
Johnson KA, Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Chao S, Coleman J, White JD, Lane B, Rosen A, 
Tinklenberg J, Belden CM, Atri A, Spann BM, Clark KA, Zamrini E, Sabbagh M, 
Killiany R, Stern R, Mez J, Kowall N, Budson AE, Obisesan TO, Ntekim OE, Wolday 
S, Khan JI, Nwulia E, Nadarajah S, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Tatsuoka C, Fatica P, 
Fletcher E, Maillard P, Olichney J, DeCarli C, Carmichael O, Bates V, Capote H, 
Rainka M, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Perrin 
A, Burke A, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Tarawneh R, Kelley B, Hart D, Zimmerman EA, 
Celmins D, Miller DD, Ponto LLB, Smith KE, Koleva H, Shim H, Nam KW, Schultz SK, 
Williamson JD, Craft S, Cleveland J, Yang M, Sink KM, Ott BR, Drake J, Tremont 
G, Daiello LA, Drake JD, Sabbagh M, Ritter A, Bernick C, Munic D, Mintz A, 
O'Connelll A, Mintzer J, Wiliams A, Masdeu J, Shi J, Garcia A, Sabbagh M, 
Newhouse P, Potkin S, Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Kittur S, Pearlson GD, 
Blank K, Anderson K, Flashman LA, Seltzer M, Hynes ML, Santulli RB, Relkin N, 
Chiang G, Lee A, Lin M, Ravdin L.

Author information:
(1)Applied Technology for Neuro-Psychology Lab, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico 
Italiano, Milan, Italy. c.tuena@auxologico.it.
(2)Applied Technology for Neuro-Psychology Lab, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico 
Italiano, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Psychology, Università degli Studi Milano-Bicocca, Milan, 
Italy.
(4)Faculty of Psychology, Università eCampus, Novedrate, Italy.
(5)Department of Geriatrics and Cardiovascular Medicine, IRCCS Istituto 
Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy.
(6)Humane Technology Lab, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Increasing research suggests that gait abnormalities can be a risk 
factor for Alzheimer's Disease (AD). Notably, there is growing evidence 
highlighting this risk factor in individuals with amnestic Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (aMCI), however further studies are needed. The aim of this study is 
to analyze cognitive tests results and brain-related measures over time in aMCI 
and examine how the presence of gait abnormalities (neurological or orthopedic) 
or normal gait affects these trends. Additionally, we sought to assess the 
significance of gait and gait-related measures as prognostic indicators for the 
progression from aMCI to AD dementia, comparing those who converted to AD with 
those who remained with a stable aMCI diagnosis during the follow-up.
METHODS: Four hundred two individuals with aMCI from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database were included. Robust linear 
mixed-effects models were used to study the impact of gait abnormalities on a 
comprehensive neuropsychological battery over 36 months while controlling for 
relevant medical variables at baseline. The impact of gait on brain measures was 
also investigated. Lastly, the Cox proportional-hazards model was used to 
explore the prognostic relevance of abnormal gait and neuropsychological 
associated tests.
RESULTS: While controlling for relevant covariates, we found that gait 
abnormalities led to a greater decline over time in attention (DSST) and global 
cognition (MMSE). Intriguingly, psychomotor speed (TMT-A) and divided attention 
(TMT-B) declined uniquely in the abnormal gait group. Conversely, specific AD 
global cognition tests (ADAS-13) and auditory-verbal memory (RAVLT immediate 
recall) declined over time independently of gait profile. All the other 
cognitive tests were not significantly affected by time or by gait profile. In 
addition, we found that ventricles size increased faster in the abnormal gait 
group compared to the normal gait group. In terms of prognosis, abnormal gait 
(HR = 1.7), MMSE (HR = 1.09), and DSST (HR = 1.03) covariates showed a higher 
impact on AD dementia conversion.
CONCLUSIONS: The importance of the link between gait and related cognitive 
functions in terms of diagnosis, prognosis, and rehabilitation in aMCI is 
critical. We showed that in aMCI gait abnormalities lead to executive 
functions/attention deterioration and conversion to AD dementia.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-023-04175-8
PMCID: PMC10388514
PMID: 37525134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


76. Neurology. 2017 Nov 21;89(21):2176-2186. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004670. Epub 
2017 Oct 25.

Alzheimer disease brain atrophy subtypes are associated with cognition and rate 
of decline.

Risacher SL(1), Anderson WH(1), Charil A(1), Castelluccio PF(1), Shcherbinin 
S(1), Saykin AJ(2), Schwarz AJ(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Trojanowki 
JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Morris J, Shaw LM, Khachaturian Z, Sorensen G, 
Carrillo M, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies P, Fillit H, Hefti F, Holtzman 
D, Mesulam MM, Potter W, Snyder P, Schwartz A, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, 
Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, Balasubramanian 
AB, Mason J, Sim I, Beckett L, Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Fox 
N, Thompson P, Schuff N, DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Vemuri P, 
Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, 
Mathis C, Landau S, Morris JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Taylor-Reinwald L, Shaw 
LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, 
Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Thal L, National 
NB, Albert M, Frank R, Hsiao J, Kaye J, Quinn J, Silbert L, Lind B, Carter R, 
Dolen S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Teodoro L, Spann BM, Brewer J, 
Vanderswag H, Fleisher A, Heidebrink JL, Lord JL, Petersen R, Mason SS, Albers 
CS, Knopman D, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Chowdhury M, Rountree S, 
Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Ances B, Morris JC, Carroll M, Creech ML, 
Franklin E, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Oliver A, Marson D, Griffith R, Clark D, 
Geldmacher D, Brockington J, Roberson E, Love MN, Grossman H, Mitsis E, Shah RC, 
deToledo-Morrell L, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Roberts P, Albert M, Onyike C, 
D'Agostino D 2nd, Kielb S, Galvin JE, Cerbone B, Michel CA, Pogorelec DM, 
Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, Glodzik L, De Santi S, Doraiswamy MP, Petrella JR, 
Borges-Neto S, Wong TZ, Coleman E, Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk D, Clark CM, 
Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, Sinha P, Oates E, Conrad G, Lopez OL, Oakley M, 
Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein BS, Martin K, Makino KM, Ismail MS, Brand 
C, Mulnard RA, Thai G, Mc-Adams-Ortiz C, Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Levey 
AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Swerdlow RH, Brooks WM, Apostolova L, Tingus K, 
Woo E, Silverman DHS, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Kendall 
T, Johnson H, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews BR, Brosch JR, Herring S, Hunt C, van 
Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Varma P, Chertkow H, Bergman H, Hosein C, Black 
S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Robin Hsiung GY, Feldman H, Mudge B, Assaly M, 
Finger E, Pasternack S, Rachisky I, Trost D, Kertesz A, Bernick C, Munic D, 
Mesulam MM, Lipowski K, Weintraub S, Bonakdarpour B, Kerwin D, Wu CK, Johnson N, 
Sadowsky C, Villena T, Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson 
KA, Marshall G, Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh 
MN, Belden CM, Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash 
A, Johnson PL, Obisesan TO, Wolday S, Allard J, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Tatsuoka C, 
Fatica P, Fletcher E, Maillard P, Olichney J, DeCarli C, Carmichael O, Kittur S, 
Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda 
A, Nguyen D, Tariot P, Burke A, Trncic N, Fleisher A, Reeder S, Bates V, Capote 
H, Rainka M, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Adeli A, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, Brown AD, 
Pearlson GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Flashman LA, Seltzer M, Hynes ML, Santulli RB, 
Sink KM, Gordineer L, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Querfurth H, 
Tremont G, Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Perry D, 
Mintzer J, Spicer K, Bachman D, Finger E, Pasternak S, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, 
Kertesz A, Drost D, Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, Schultz SK, Boles Ponto LL, 
Shim H, Smith KE, Relkin N, Chaing G, Lin M, Ravdin L, Smith A, Raj BA, Fargher 
K.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences (S.L.R., A.J. Saykin, 
A.J. Schwarz), Indiana Alzheimer Disease Center (S.L.R., A.J. Saykin), and 
Department of Biostatistics (P.F.C.), Indiana University School of Medicine; Eli 
Lilly and Company (W.H.A., A.C., S.S., A.J. Schwarz), Indianapolis; and 
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences (A.J. Schwarz), Indiana 
University, Bloomington.
(2)From the Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences (S.L.R., A.J. Saykin, 
A.J. Schwarz), Indiana Alzheimer Disease Center (S.L.R., A.J. Saykin), and 
Department of Biostatistics (P.F.C.), Indiana University School of Medicine; Eli 
Lilly and Company (W.H.A., A.C., S.S., A.J. Schwarz), Indianapolis; and 
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences (A.J. Schwarz), Indiana 
University, Bloomington. asaykin@iupui.edu a.schwarz@lilly.com.

OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that cortical and hippocampal volumes, 
measured in vivo from volumetric MRI (vMRI) scans, could be used to identify 
variant subtypes of Alzheimer disease (AD) and to prospectively predict the rate 
of clinical decline.
METHODS: Amyloid-positive participants with AD from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 1 and ADNI2 with baseline MRI scans (n = 229) and 
2-year clinical follow-up (n = 100) were included. AD subtypes (hippocampal 
sparing [HpSpMRI], limbic predominant [LPMRI], typical AD [tADMRI]) were defined 
according to an algorithm analogous to one recently proposed for tau 
neuropathology. Relationships between baseline hippocampal volume to cortical 
volume ratio (HV:CTV) and clinical variables were examined by both continuous 
regression and categorical models.
RESULTS: When participants were divided categorically, the HpSpMRI group showed 
significantly more AD-like hypometabolism on 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-PET (p < 
0.05) and poorer baseline executive function (p < 0.001). Other baseline 
clinical measures did not differ across the 3 groups. Participants with HpSpMRI 
also showed faster subsequent clinical decline than participants with LPMRI on 
the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale, 13-Item Subscale (ADAS-Cog13), 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), and Functional Assessment Questionnaire 
(all p < 0.05) and tADMRI on the MMSE and Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes 
(CDR-SB) (both p < 0.05). Finally, a larger HV:CTV was associated with poorer 
baseline executive function and a faster slope of decline in CDR-SB, MMSE, and 
ADAS-Cog13 score (p < 0.05). These associations were driven mostly by the amount 
of cortical rather than hippocampal atrophy.
CONCLUSIONS: AD subtypes with phenotypes consistent with those observed with tau 
neuropathology can be identified in vivo with vMRI. An increased HV:CTV ratio 
was predictive of faster clinical decline in participants with AD who were 
clinically indistinguishable at baseline except for a greater dysexecutive 
presentation.

© 2017 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004670
PMCID: PMC5696639
PMID: 29070667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2022 Dec;44(10):703-712. doi: 
10.1080/13803395.2023.2167942. Epub 2023 Feb 20.

Predicting conversion of patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer's 
disease using bedside cognitive assessments.

Clarke A(1), Ashe C(1), Jenkinson J(1), Rowe O(1), A D N I(1), Hyland P(1), 
Commins S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Ireland.

INTRODUCTION: Patients diagnosed with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) often go 
on to develop dementia, however many do not. Although cognitive tests are widely 
used in the clinic, there is limited research on their potential to help predict 
which patients may progress to Alzheimer's disease (AD) from those that do not.
METHODS: MCI patients (n = 325) from the longitudinal Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI-2) dataset were tracked across a 5 year period. 
Upon initial diagnosis, all patients underwent a series of cognitive tests 
including the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA) and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive (ADAS-Cog 
13). Twenty-five percent (n = 83) of those initially diagnosed with MCI 
subsequently developed AD within 5 years.
RESULTS: We showed that those individuals that progressed to AD had 
significantly lower scores upon baseline testing on the MMSE and MoCA, and 
higher scores on the ADAS-13, compared to those that did not convert. However, 
not all tests were equivalent. We showed that the ADAS-13 offers the best 
predictability of conversion (Adjusted Odds ratio (AOR) = 3.91). This 
predictability was higher than that offered by the two primary biomarker 
Amyloid-beta (Aβ, AOR = 1.99) and phospho-tau (Ptau, AOR = 1.72). Further 
analysis on the ADAS-13 showed that MCI patients that subsequently converted to 
AD performed particularly poorly on delayed-recall (AOR = 1.93), word 
recognition (AOR = 1.66), word finding difficulty (AOR = 1.55) and orientation 
(1.38) test items.
CONCLUSIONS: Cognitive testing using the ADAS-13 may offer a simpler, less 
invasive, more clinically relevant and a more effective method of determining 
those that are in danger of converting from MCI to AD.

DOI: 10.1080/13803395.2023.2167942
PMID: 36803664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;88(3):1115-1125. doi: 10.3233/JAD-220002.

The Associations of Cerebrospinal Fluid Ferritin with Neurodegeneration and 
Neuroinflammation Along the Alzheimer's Disease Continuum.

Pan R(1), Luo S(2), Huang Q(3), Li W(4), Cai T(5), Lai K(4), Shi X(4)(4); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, Huizhou Health Sciences Polytechnic, Huizhou, Guangdong 
Province, P. R. China.
(2)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The Third People's Hospital of Huizhou, 
Huizhou, Guangdong Province, P. R. China.
(3)School of Foreign Languages, Huizhou University, Huizhou, Guangdong Province, 
P. R. China.
(4)School of Clinical Medicine, Huizhou Health Sciences Polytechnic, Huizhou, 
Guangdong Province, P. R. China.
(5)School of Medicine and Medical Laboratory Science, Huizhou Health Sciences 
Polytechnic, Huizhou, Guangdong Province, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence has suggested that iron accumulation plays an 
important role in the onset and development of Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
However, the potential mechanism remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE: The present study investigated the associations of cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) ferritin, an indicator for brain iron load, with neurodegenerative 
and inflammatory changes in AD.
METHODS: The study involved 302 participants from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). They were classified as normal controls (A-T-N-, 
n = 48), AD continuum (A+TN-, n = 46; A+TN+, n = 166), and suspected non-AD 
pathology (A-TN+, n = 42), according to the amyloid/tau/neurodegeneration (ATN) 
system. Group comparisons of CSF ferritin among groups were performed using 
one-way ANOVA. Linear regression models were used to test the relationships 
between CSF ferritin and cognitive assessments, and the associations between CSF 
ferritin and other biomarkers, respectively.
RESULTS: We found that CSF ferritin showed significant differences among the ATN 
groups, with higher concentration in more advanced categories (A+TN+). 
Furthermore, CSF ferritin level was independently related to cognitive 
performance (MMSE, ADAS-Cog13, and ADNI-mem). Linear regression analysis 
indicated positive relationships between CSF ferritin and phosphorylated tau and 
total tau, rather than Aβ42. Significant associations were revealed between CSF 
ferritin and inflammatory proteins, including TNF-α, TNFR1, TNFR2, ICAM1, VCAM1, 
TGF-β1, IL-9, and IP-10, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Our results provide new insight into iron dysfunction in AD 
pathology and highlight elevated brain iron as a possible mechanism of 
neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation along AD continuum.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-220002
PMID: 35754266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Alzheimers Dis. 2024;101(1):159-173. doi: 10.3233/JAD-240523.

A Predictive Model of the Progression to Alzheimer's Disease in Patients with 
Mild Cognitive Impairment Based on the MRI Enlarged Perivascular Spaces.

Chen J(1), Yang J(1), Shen D(1), Wang X(1), Lin Z(1), Chen H(1), Cui G(1), Zhang 
Z(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical 
University, Xuzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a heterogeneous condition that 
can precede various forms of dementia, including Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
Identifying MCI subjects who are at high risk of progressing to AD is of major 
clinical relevance. Enlarged perivascular spaces (EPVS) on MRI are linked to 
cognitive decline, but their predictive value for MCI to AD progression is 
unclear.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to assess the predictive value of EPVS for MCI to AD 
progression and develop a predictive model combining EPVS grading with clinical 
and laboratory data to estimate conversion risk.
METHODS: We analyzed 358 patients with MCI from the ADNI database, consisting of 
177 MCI-AD converters and 181 non-converters. The data collected included 
demographic information, imaging data (including perivascular spaces grade), 
clinical assessments, and laboratory test results. Variable selection was 
conducted using the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) 
method, followed by logistic regression to develop predictive model.
RESULTS: In the univariate logistic regression analysis, both moderate 
(OR = 5.54, 95% CI [3.04-10.18]) and severe (OR = 25.04, 95% CI [10.07-62.23]) 
enlargements of the centrum semiovale perivascular space (CSO-PVS) were found to 
be strong predictors of disease progression. LASSO analyses yielded 12 
variables, refined to six in the final model: APOE4 genotype, ADAS11 score, 
CSO-PVS grade, and volumes of entorhinal, fusiform, and midtemporal regions, 
with an AUC of 0.956 in the training and 0.912 in the validation cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: Our predictive model, emphasizing EPVS assessment, provides 
clinicians with a practical tool for early detection and management of AD risk 
in MCI patients.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-240523
PMID: 39177602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2022 Dec 13;14(1):185. doi: 10.1186/s13195-022-01136-y.

Associations of MRI-visible perivascular spaces with longitudinal cognitive 
decline across the Alzheimer's disease spectrum.

Wang ML(1), Zou QQ(1), Sun Z(1), Wei XE(1), Li PY(2), Wu X(3), Li YH(4); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated to 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, No. 600, Yi Shan Road, 
Shanghai, 200233, China.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Pauley Heart Center, Virginia Commonwealth 
University, Richmond, VA, USA.
(3)Institute for Global Health Sciences, University of California San Francisco, 
San Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated to 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, No. 600, Yi Shan Road, 
Shanghai, 200233, China. liyuehua312@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the characteristics and associations of MRI-visible 
perivascular spaces (PVS) with clinical progression and longitudinal cognitive 
decline across the Alzheimer's disease spectrum.
METHODS: We included 1429 participants (641 [44.86%] female) from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. PVS number and 
grade in the centrum semiovale (CSO-PVS), basal ganglia (BG-PVS), and 
hippocampus (HP-PVS) were compared among the control (CN), mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), and Alzheimer's disease (AD) groups. PVS were tested as 
predictors of diagnostic progression (i.e., CN to MCI/AD or MCI to AD) and 
longitudinal changes in the 13-item Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog 13), Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), 
memory (ADNI-MEM), and executive function (ADNI-EF) using multiple linear 
regression, linear mixed-effects, and Cox proportional hazards modeling.
RESULTS: Compared with CN subjects, MCI and AD subjects had more CSO-PVS, both 
in number (p < 0.001) and grade (p < 0.001). However, there was no significant 
difference in BG-PVS and HP-PVS across the AD spectrum (p > 0.05). Individuals 
with moderate and frequent/severe CSO-PVS had a higher diagnostic conversion 
risk than individuals with no/mild CSO-PVS (log-rank p < 0.001 for all) in the 
combined CN and MCI group. Further Cox regression analyses revealed that 
moderate and frequent/severe CSO-PVS were associated with a higher risk of 
diagnostic conversion (HR = 2.007, 95% CI = 1.382-2.914, p < 0.001; HR = 2.676, 
95% CI = 1.830-3.911, p < 0.001, respectively). A higher CSO-PVS number was 
associated with baseline cognitive performance and longitudinal cognitive 
decline in all cognitive tests (p < 0.05 for all).
CONCLUSIONS: CSO-PVS were more common in MCI and AD and were associated with 
cognitive decline across the AD spectrum.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-022-01136-y
PMCID: PMC9746143
PMID: 36514127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


81. Neurology. 2021 Sep 20;97(12):e1243-e1252. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000012512.

Impact of C-Reactive Protein on Cognition and Alzheimer Disease Biomarkers in 
Homozygous APOE ɛ4 Carriers.

Tao Q(1), Alvin Ang TF(1), Akhter-Khan SC(1), Itchapurapu IS(1), Killiany R(1), 
Zhang X(1), Budson AE(1), Turk KW(1), Goldstein L(1), Mez J(1), Alosco ML(1), 
Qiu WQ(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics (Q.T., 
I.S.I., W.Q.Q.), Framingham Heart Study (Q.T., T.F.A.A.), Department of Anatomy 
and Neurobiology (T.F.A.A., R.K.), Slone Epidemiology Center (T.F.A.A.), 
Department of Medicine (X.Z.), Department of Neurology (A.E.B., K.W.T., J.M., 
M.L.A.), Department of Psychiatry (W.Q.Q.), and Alzheimer's Disease and CTE 
Centers (A.E.B., K.W.T., L.G., J.M., M.L.A., W.Q.Q.), Boston University School 
of Medicine, MA; Department of Psychology (S.C.A.-K.), Humboldt University of 
Berlin, Germany; Department of Health Service and Population Research 
(S.C.A.-K.), King's College London, UK; and Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare 
System (A.E.B., K.W.T.), MA.
(2)From the Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics (Q.T., 
I.S.I., W.Q.Q.), Framingham Heart Study (Q.T., T.F.A.A.), Department of Anatomy 
and Neurobiology (T.F.A.A., R.K.), Slone Epidemiology Center (T.F.A.A.), 
Department of Medicine (X.Z.), Department of Neurology (A.E.B., K.W.T., J.M., 
M.L.A.), Department of Psychiatry (W.Q.Q.), and Alzheimer's Disease and CTE 
Centers (A.E.B., K.W.T., L.G., J.M., M.L.A., W.Q.Q.), Boston University School 
of Medicine, MA; Department of Psychology (S.C.A.-K.), Humboldt University of 
Berlin, Germany; Department of Health Service and Population Research 
(S.C.A.-K.), King's College London, UK; and Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare 
System (A.E.B., K.W.T.), MA. wqiu67@bu.edu.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2022 Nov 15;99(20):919. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000201509.
    Neurology. 2022 Nov 15;99(20):918-919. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000201508.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Previous research has shown that elevated blood 
C-reactive protein (CRP) is associated with increased Alzheimer disease (AD) 
risk only in APOE ε4 allele carriers; the objective of this study was to examine 
the interactive effects of plasma CRP and APOE genotype on cognition and AD 
biomarkers.
METHODS: Data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) study 
were analyzed, including APOE genotype; plasma CRP concentrations; diagnostic 
status (i.e., mild cognitive impairment and dementia due to AD); Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE) and Clinical Dementia Rating Dementia Staging 
Instrument scores; CSF concentrations of β-amyloid peptide (Aβ42), total tau 
(t-Tau) and phosphorylated tau (p-Tau); and amyloid (AV45) PET imaging. 
Multivariable regression analyses tested the associations between plasma CRP and 
APOE on cognitive and biomarker outcomes.
RESULTS: Among 566 ADNI participants, 274 (48.4%) had no, 222 (39.2%) had 1, and 
70 (12.4%) had 2 APOE ε4 alleles. Among only participants who had 2 APOE ε4 
alleles, elevated CRP was associated with lower MMSE score at baseline (β [95% 
confidence interval] -0.52 [-1.01, -0.12]) and 12-month follow-up (β -1.09 
[-1.88, -0.17]) after adjustment for sex, age, and education. The interaction of 
2 APOE ε4 alleles and elevated plasma CRP was associated with increased CSF 
levels of t-Tau (β = 11.21, SE 3.37, p < 0.001) and p-Tau (β = +2.74, SE 1.14, p 
< 0.01). Among those who had no APOE ε4 alleles, elevated CRP was associated 
with decreased CSF t-Tau and p-Tau. These effects were stronger at the 12-month 
follow-up.
DISCUSSION: CRP released during peripheral inflammation could be a mediator in 
APOE ε4-related AD neurodegeneration and serve as a drug target for AD.

© 2021 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000012512
PMCID: PMC8480484
PMID: 34266923


82. CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol. 2023 Jul;12(7):1029-1042. doi: 
10.1002/psp4.12974. Epub 2023 May 2.

Modeling Alzheimer's disease progression utilizing clinical trial and ADNI data 
to predict longitudinal trajectory of CDR-SB.

Jamalian S(1), Dolton M(2), Chanu P(3), Ramakrishnan V(1), Franco Y(1), 
Wildsmith K(1), Manser P(1), Teng E(1), Jin JY(1), Quartino A(1), Hsu JC(1); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Roche Products Australia Pty Ltd., Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Genentech/Roche, Lyon, France.

There is strong interest in developing predictive models to better understand 
individual heterogeneity and disease progression in Alzheimer's disease (AD). We 
have built upon previous longitudinal AD progression models, using a nonlinear, 
mixed-effect modeling approach to predict Clinical Dementia Rating Scale - Sum 
of Boxes (CDR-SB) progression. Data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (observational study) and placebo arms from four interventional 
trials (N = 1093) were used for model building. The placebo arms from two 
additional interventional trials (N = 805) were used for external model 
validation. In this modeling framework, CDR-SB progression over the disease 
trajectory timescale was obtained for each participant by estimating disease 
onset time (DOT). Disease progression following DOT was described by both global 
progression rate (RATE) and individual progression rate (α). Baseline 
Mini-Mental State Examination and CDR-SB scores described the interindividual 
variabilities in DOT and α well. This model successfully predicted outcomes in 
the external validation datasets, supporting its suitability for prospective 
prediction and use in design of future trials. By predicting individual 
participants' disease progression trajectories using baseline characteristics 
and comparing these against the observed responses to new agents, the model can 
help assess treatment effects and support decision making for future trials.

© 2023 Genentech, Inc. CPT: Pharmacometrics & Systems Pharmacology published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology 
and Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/psp4.12974
PMCID: PMC10349194
PMID: 37101394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.J., V.R., E.T., J.Y.J., and J.C.H. are all 
full‐time employees of Genentech, Inc. and may own company stock/stock options. 
M.D. is an employee of Roche Products Pty Ltd. and owns stock/stock options in 
F. Hoffmann‐La Roche Ltd. P.C. is an employee of Roche/Genentech and owns Roche 
stock options. Y.F. is a former employee of Genentech, Inc. K.W. is a former 
full‐time employee of Genentech, Inc. and may own company stock/stock options. 
P.M. is a former employee of Genentech, Inc. A.Q. was an employee of Genentech, 
Inc. at the time of this study (current affiliation: Clinical Pharmacology and 
Quantitative Pharmacology, AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden).


83. Front Aging Neurosci. 2023 Oct 24;15:1256389. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2023.1256389. 
eCollection 2023.

Association between cerebrospinal fluid clusterin and biomarkers of Alzheimer's 
disease pathology in mild cognitive impairment: a longitudinal cohort study.

Wang H(#)(1), Ma LZ(#)(2), Sheng ZH(#)(2), Liu JY(#)(2), Yuan WY(1), Guo F(2), 
Zhang W(1)(2)(3), Tan L(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Hospital of Weifang Medical University, 
School of Clinical Medicine, Weifang Medical University, Weifang, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, University of Health and 
Rehabilitation Sciences, Qingdao, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Clusterin, a glycoprotein implicated in Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
remains unclear. The objective of this study was to analyze the effect of 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) clusterin in relation to AD biomarkers using a 
longitudinal cohort of non-demented individuals.
METHODS: We gathered a sample comprising 86 individuals under cognition normal 
(CN) and 134 patients diagnosed with MCI via the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. To investigate the correlation of CSF 
clusterin with cognitive function and markers of key physiological changes, we 
employed multiple linear regression and mixed-effect models. We undertook a 
causal mediation analysis to inspect the mediating influence of CSF clusterin on 
cognitive abilities.
RESULTS: Pathological characteristics associated with baseline Aβ42, Tau, brain 
volume, exhibited a correlation with initial CSF clusterin in the general 
population, Specifically, these correlations were especially prominent in the 
MCI population; CSF Aβ42 (PCN = 0.001; PMCI = 0.007), T-tau (PCN < 0.001; 
PMCI < 0.001), and Mid temporal (PCN = 0.033; PMCI = 0.005). Baseline CSF 
clusterin level was predictive of measurable cognitive shifts in the MCI 
population, as indicated by MMSE (β = 0.202, p = 0.029), MEM (β = 0.186, p = 
0.036), RAVLT immediate recall (β = 0.182, p = 0.038), and EF scores (β = 0.221, 
p = 0.013). In MCI population, the alterations in brain regions (17.87% of the 
total effect) mediated the effect of clusterin on cognition. It was found that 
variables such as age, gender, and presence of APOE ε4 carrier status, 
influenced some of these connections.
CONCLUSION: Our investigation underscored a correlation between CSF clusterin 
concentrations and pivotal AD indicators, while also highlighting clusterin's 
potential role as a protective factor for cognitive abilities in MCI patients.

Copyright © 2023 Wang, Ma, Sheng, Liu, Yuan, Guo, Zhang and Tan.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2023.1256389
PMCID: PMC10629112
PMID: 37941999

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor J-TY 
declared a past co-authorship with the author LT.


84. Brain Sci. 2020 Nov 20;10(11):879. doi: 10.3390/brainsci10110879.

Association between Structural Connectivity and Generalized Cognitive Spectrum 
in Alzheimer's Disease.

Lombardi A(1), Amoroso N(1)(2), Diacono D(1), Monaco A(1), Logroscino G(3)(4), 
De Blasi R(5), Bellotti R(1)(6), Tangaro S(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Bari, 70125 Bari, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Farmacia-Scienze del Farmaco, Università degli Studi di Bari, 
70125 Bari, Italy.
(3)Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases and the Aging Brain, Università degli 
Studi di Bari at Pia Fondazione "Card. G. Panico", 73039 Tricase, Italy.
(4)Department of Basic Medicine Neuroscience and Sense Organs, Università degli 
Studi di Bari, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(5)Pia Fondazione "Card. G. Panico", 73039 Tricase, Italy.
(6)Dipartimento Interateneo di Fisica, Università degli Studi di Bari, 70126 
Bari, Italy.
(7)Dipartimento di Scienze del Suolo, della Pianta e degli Alimenti, Università 
degli Studi di Bari, 70126 Bari, Italy.

Modeling disease progression through the cognitive scores has become an 
attractive challenge in the field of computational neuroscience due to its 
importance for early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Several scores such 
as Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale cognitive total score, Mini Mental State 
Exam score and Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test provide a quantitative 
assessment of the cognitive conditions of the patients and are commonly used as 
objective criteria for clinical diagnosis of dementia and mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI). On the other hand, connectivity patterns extracted from 
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) have been successfully used to classify AD and 
MCI subjects with machine learning algorithms proving their potential 
application in the clinical setting. In this work, we carried out a pilot study 
to investigate the strength of association between DTI structural connectivity 
of a mixed ADNI cohort and cognitive spectrum in AD. We developed a machine 
learning framework to find a generalized cognitive score that summarizes the 
different functional domains reflected by each cognitive clinical index and to 
identify the connectivity biomarkers more significantly associated with the 
score. The results indicate that the efficiency and the centrality of some 
regions can effectively track cognitive impairment in AD showing a significant 
correlation with the generalized cognitive score (R = 0.7).

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci10110879
PMCID: PMC7699729
PMID: 33233622

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


85. Health Inf Sci Syst. 2024 Mar 6;12(1):19. doi: 10.1007/s13755-023-00269-0. 
eCollection 2024 Dec.

Jointly constrained group sparse connectivity representation improves early 
diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease on routinely acquired T1-weighted imaging-based 
brain network.

Zhu C(#)(1), Li H(#)(2), Song Z(1), Jiang M(1), Song L(3), Li L(4), Wang X(1), 
Zheng Q(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer and Control Engineering, Yantai University, No 30, 
Qingquan Road, Laishan District, Yantai, 264005 Shandong China.
(2)Departments of Medical Oncology and Radiology, Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding 
Hospital of Qingdao University Medical College, Yantai, 264099 China.
(3)School of Medical Imaging, Weifang Medical University, Weifang, 261000 China.
(4)Yantaishan Hospital Affiliated to Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, 264003 
China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Radiomics-based morphological brain networks (radMBN) constructed 
from routinely acquired structural MRI (sMRI) data have gained attention in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the radMBN suffers from limited 
characterization of AD because sMRI only characterizes anatomical changes and is 
not a direct measure of neuronal pathology or brain activity.
PURPOSE: To establish a group sparse representation of the radMBN under a joint 
constraint of group-level white matter fiber connectivity and individual-level 
sMRI regional similarity (JCGS-radMBN).
METHODS: Two publicly available datasets were adopted, including 120 subjects 
from ADNI with both T1-weighted image (T1WI) and diffusion MRI (dMRI) for 
JCGS-radMBN construction, 818 subjects from ADNI and 200 subjects solely with 
T1WI from AIBL for validation in early AD diagnosis. Specifically, the 
JCGS-radMBN was conducted by jointly estimating non-zero connections among 
subjects, with the regularization term constrained by group-level white matter 
fiber connectivity and individual-level sMRI regional similarity. Then, a 
triplet graph convolutional network was adopted for early AD diagnosis. The 
discriminative brain connections were identified using a two-sample t-test, and 
the neurobiological interpretation was validated by correlating the 
discriminative brain connections with cognitive scores.
RESULTS: The JCGS-radMBN exhibited superior classification performance over five 
brain network construction methods. For the typical NC vs. AD classification, 
the JCGS-radMBN increased by 1-30% in accuracy over the alternatives on ADNI and 
AIBL. The discriminative brain connections exhibited a strong connectivity to 
hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus, and basal ganglia, and had significant 
correlation with MMSE scores.
CONCLUSION: The proposed JCGS-radMBN facilitated the AD characterization of 
brain network established on routinely acquired imaging modality of sMRI.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The online version of this article 
(10.1007/s13755-023-00269-0) contains supplementary material, which is available 
to authorized users.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024. 
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds 
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) 
or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript 
version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing 
agreement and applicable law.

DOI: 10.1007/s13755-023-00269-0
PMCID: PMC10917732
PMID: 38464465

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors have no 
potential conflicts of interest to disclose.


86. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;62(2):621-633. doi: 10.3233/JAD-170082.

Deep Brain Stimulation of Frontal Lobe Networks to Treat Alzheimer's Disease.

Scharre DW(1), Weichart E(2), Nielson D(3), Zhang J(4), Agrawal P(5), Sederberg 
PB(2), Knopp MV(4), Rezai AR(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Cognitive Neurology Division, The Ohio State 
University Wexner Medical Center, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, OH, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, OH, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Movement Disorder Division, The Ohio State 
University Wexner Medical Center, OH, USA.

The study objective was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of deep brain 
stimulation (DBS) at the ventral capsule/ventral striatum (VC/VS) region to 
specifically modulate frontal lobe behavioral and cognitive networks as a novel 
treatment approach for Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. This is a 
non-randomized phase I prospective open label interventional trial of three 
subjects with matched comparison groups. AD participants given DBS for at least 
18 months at the VC/VS target were compared on the Clinical Dementia Rating-Sum 
of Boxes (CDR-SB), our primary outcome clinical measure, to matched groups 
without DBS from the AD Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort. Serial 
2-Deoxy-2-[18F]fluoro-D-glucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) images 
of AD participants were also compared longitudinally over time. Three AD DBS 
participants were matched to subjects from the ADNI cohort. All participants 
tolerated DBS well without significant adverse events. All three AD DBS 
participants had less performance decline and two of them meaningfully less 
decline over time on our primary outcome measure, CDR-SB, relative to matched 
comparison groups from the ADNI using score trajectory slopes. Minimal changes 
or increased metabolism on FDG-PET were seen in frontal cortical regions after 
chronic DBS at the VC/VS target. The first use of DBS in AD at a frontal lobe 
behavior regulation target (VC/VS) was well-tolerated and revealed less 
performance decline in CDR-SB. Frontal network modulation to improve executive 
and behavioral deficits should be furthered studied in AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-170082
PMID: 29400666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Alzheimers Dis. 2024;101(3):987-999. doi: 10.3233/JAD-240434.

Do Tau Deposition and Glucose Metabolism Dissociate in Alzheimer's Disease 
Trajectory?

Nowell J(1), Raza S(1), Livingston NR(1), Sivanathan S(1), Gentleman S(1), 
Edison P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain Sciences, Division of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Imperial College London, London, UK.
(2)School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales, UK.

BACKGROUND: Tau aggregation demonstrates close associations with hypometabolism 
in Alzheimer's disease (AD), although differing pathophysiological processes may 
underlie their development.
OBJECTIVE: To establish whether tau deposition and glucose metabolism have 
different trajectories in AD progression and evaluate the utility of global 
measures of these pathological hallmarks in predicting cognitive deficits.
METHODS: 279 participants with amyloid-β (Aβ) status, and T1-weighted MRI scans, 
were selected from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(http://adni.loni.usc.edu). We created the standard uptake value ratio images 
using Statistical Parametric Mapping 12 for [18F]AV1451-PET (tau) and 
[18F]FDG-PET (glucose metabolism) scans. Voxel-wise group and single-subject 
level SPM analysis evaluated the relationship between global [18F]FDG-PET and 
[18F]AV1451-PET depending on the Aβ status. Linear models assessed whether tau 
deposition or glucose metabolism better predicted clinical progression.
RESULTS: There was a dissociation between global cerebral glucose hypometabolism 
and global tau load in amyloid-positive AD and amyloid-negative mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) (p > 0.05). Global hypometabolism was only associated with 
global cortical tau in amyloid-positive MCI. Voxel-level single subject tau load 
better predicted neuropsychological performance, Alzheimer's disease assessment 
scale-cognitive (ADAS-Cog) 13 score, and one-year change compared with regional 
and global hypometabolism.
CONCLUSIONS: A dissociation between tau pathology and glucose metabolism at a 
global level in AD could imply that other pathological processes influence 
glucose metabolism. Furthermore, as tau is a better predictor of clinical 
progression, these processes may have independent trajectories and require 
independent consideration in the context of therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-240434
PMID: 39302365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2024 Mar 19;16(1):61. doi: 10.1186/s13195-024-01428-5.

Comparing a pre-defined versus deep learning approach for extracting brain 
atrophy patterns to predict cognitive decline due to Alzheimer's disease in 
patients with mild cognitive symptoms.

Arvidsson I(1), Strandberg O(2), Palmqvist S(2)(3), Stomrud E(2)(3), Cullen 
N(2), Janelidze S(2), Tideman P(2)(3), Heyden A(4), Åström K(4), Hansson 
O(2)(3), Mattsson-Carlgren N(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. 
ida.arvidsson@math.lth.se.
(2)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Malmö, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Memory Clinic, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
(4)Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(5)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Malmö, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden. niklas.mattsson-carlgren@med.lu.se.
(6)Wallenberg Center for Molecular Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. 
niklas.mattsson-carlgren@med.lu.se.
(7)Department of Neurology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. 
niklas.mattsson-carlgren@med.lu.se.

Update of
    Res Sq. 2023 Nov 08:rs.3.rs-3569391. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-3569391/v1.

BACKGROUND: Predicting future Alzheimer's disease (AD)-related cognitive decline 
among individuals with subjective cognitive decline (SCD) or mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) is an important task for healthcare. Structural brain imaging 
as measured by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) could potentially contribute 
when making such predictions. It is unclear if the predictive performance of MRI 
can be improved using entire brain images in deep learning (DL) models compared 
to using pre-defined brain regions.
METHODS: A cohort of 332 individuals with SCD/MCI were included from the Swedish 
BioFINDER-1 study. The goal was to predict longitudinal SCD/MCI-to-AD dementia 
progression and change in Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) over four years. 
Four models were evaluated using different predictors: (1) clinical data only, 
including demographics, cognitive tests and APOE ε4 status, (2) clinical data 
plus hippocampal volume, (3) clinical data plus all regional MRI gray matter 
volumes (N = 68) extracted using FreeSurfer software, (4) a DL model trained 
using multi-task learning with MRI images, Jacobian determinant images and 
baseline cognition as input. A double cross-validation scheme, with five test 
folds and for each of those ten validation folds, was used. External evaluation 
was performed on part of the ADNI dataset, including 108 patients. Mann-Whitney 
U-test was used to determine statistically significant differences in 
performance, with p-values less than 0.05 considered significant.
RESULTS: In the BioFINDER cohort, 109 patients (33%) progressed to AD dementia. 
The performance of the clinical data model for prediction of progression to AD 
dementia was area under the curve (AUC) = 0.85 and four-year cognitive decline 
was R2 = 0.14. The performance was improved for both outcomes when adding 
hippocampal volume (AUC = 0.86, R2 = 0.16). Adding FreeSurfer brain regions 
improved prediction of four-year cognitive decline but not progression to AD 
(AUC = 0.83, R2 = 0.17), while the DL model worsened the performance for both 
outcomes (AUC = 0.84, R2 = 0.08). A sensitivity analysis showed that the 
Jacobian determinant image was more informative than the MRI image, but that 
performance was maximized when both were included. In the external evaluation 
cohort from ADNI, 23 patients (21%) progressed to AD dementia. The results for 
predicted progression to AD dementia were similar to the results for the 
BioFINDER test data, while the performance for the cognitive decline was 
deteriorated.
CONCLUSIONS: The DL model did not significantly improve the prediction of 
clinical disease progression in AD, compared to regression models with a single 
pre-defined brain region.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-024-01428-5
PMCID: PMC10949809
PMID: 38504336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: OH has acquired research support (for the 
institution) from ADx, AVID Radiopharmaceuticals, Biogen, Eli Lilly, Eisai, 
Fujirebio, GE Healthcare, Pfizer, and Roche. In the past 2 years, he has 
received consultancy/speaker fees from AC Immune, Amylyx, Alzpath, BioArctic, 
Biogen, Cerveau, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Fujirebio, Merck, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, 
Roche, Sanofi and Siemens. SP has acquired research support (for the 
institution) from ki elements / ADDF. In the past 2 years, he has received 
consultancy/speaker fees from BioArtic, Biogen, Lilly, and Roche.


89. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2020 Apr-Jun;34(2):141-147. doi: 
10.1097/WAD.0000000000000356.

Association Between Neuropsychiatric Symptom Trajectory and Conversion to 
Alzheimer Disease.

Lo TWB(1)(2), Karameh WK(2)(3)(4), Barfett JJ(2)(5), Fornazzari LR(2), Munoz 
DG(2)(6)(7), Schweizer TA(2)(8)(9)(10)(11), Fischer CE(2)(9)(3); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Psychology, University of Toronto Scarborough, Scarborough.
(2)Keenan Research Centre for Biomedical Research, Li Ka Shing Knowledge 
Institute.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto.
(4)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Department of Medical Imaging.
(6)Division of Pathology.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology.
(8)Division of Neurosurgery, St. Michael's Hospital.
(9)Institute of Medical Sciences.
(10)Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering.
(11)Department of Surgery, Division of Neurosurgery.

INTRODUCTION: Neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS) are both common in mild cognitive 
impairment and Alzheimer disease (AD). Studies have shown that some NPS such as 
apathy and depression are a key indicator for progression to AD.
METHODS: We compared Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) total score and NPI 
subdomain score between mild cognitive impairment-converters (MCI-C) and mild 
cognitive impairment-nonconverters (MCI-NC) longitudinally for 6 years using the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. In addition to the 
NPI, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores were also compared to find out 
if MMSE scores would differ between different NPI groups. Lastly, a linear 
regression model was done on MMSE and NPI total score to establish a 
relationship between MMSE and NPI total score.
RESULTS: The results in this study showed that NPI total scores between MCI-C 
and MCI-NC differed significantly throughout 6 years. MCI-C subjects had a 
higher mean NPI total score and lower MMSE score compared with MCI-NC subjects. 
In addition, MMSE scores were significantly different between the 3 groups of 
NPI total score. Subjects who have a high NPI score have the lowest mean MMSE 
score, thus demonstrating that NPI scores do indeed affect MMSE scores. Further 
analyses using a regression model revealed that a unit change in NPI total score 
lead to 0.1 to 0.3 decrease in MMSE.
DISCUSSION: On the basis of the findings, this study showed evidence that 
increase in NPS burden (reflected by increase in NPI) over time predicts 
conversion to AD, whereas stability of symptoms (reflected by stable NPI score) 
favors nonconversion. Further study should investigate the underlying mechanisms 
that drive both NPS burden and cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0000000000000356
PMID: 31633557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. IBRO Neurosci Rep. 2022 Sep 3;13:255-263. doi: 10.1016/j.ibneur.2022.08.010. 
eCollection 2022 Dec.

Ensemble learning using traditional machine learning and deep neural network for 
diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease.

Nguyen D(1)(2), Nguyen H(1)(2), Ong H(1)(2), Le H(3), Ha H(1)(2), Duc NT(4)(5), 
Ngo HT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering, International University, Vietnam.
(2)Vietnam National University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
(3)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, York University, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Biomedical Science and Engineering, Institute of Integrated 
Technology, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, South Korea.
(5)Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

In recent years, Alzheimer's disease (AD) diagnosis using neuroimaging and deep 
learning has drawn great research attention. However, due to the scarcity of 
training neuroimaging data, many deep learning models have suffered from severe 
overfitting. In this study, we propose an ensemble learning framework that 
combines deep learning and machine learning. The deep learning model was based 
on a 3D-ResNet to exploit 3D structural features of neuroimaging data. 
Meanwhile, Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) machine learning was applied on a 
voxel-wise basis to draw the most significant voxel groups out of the image. The 
3D-ResNet and XGBoost predictions were combined with patient demographics and 
cognitive test scores (Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Clinical 
Dementia Rating (CDR)) to give a final diagnosis prediction. Our proposed method 
was trained and validated on brain MRI brain images of the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset. During the training phase, multiple data 
augmentation methods were employed to tackle overfitting. Our test set contained 
only baseline scans, i.e., the first visit scans since we aimed to investigate 
the ability of our approach in detecting AD during the first visit of AD 
patients. Our 5-fold cross-validation implementation achieved an average AUC of 
100% during training and 96% during testing. Using the same computer, our method 
was much faster in scoring a prediction, approximately 10 min, than feature 
extraction-based machine learning methods, which often take many hours to score 
a prediction. To make the prediction explainable, we visualized the brain MRI 
image regions that primarily affected the 3D-ResNet model's prediction via 
heatmap. Lastly, we observed that proper generation of test sets was critical to 
avoiding the data leakage issue and ensuring the validity of results.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibneur.2022.08.010
PMCID: PMC9795286
PMID: 36590098

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interest: None.


91. Neurosci Lett. 2020 Jan 1;714:134563. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2019.134563. Epub 
2019 Oct 31.

Associations of cigarette smoking with memory decline and neurodegeneration 
among cognitively normal older individuals.

Wu P(1), Li W(1), Cai X(1), Yan H(2), Chen M(3); for Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325000, PR China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ruian People's Hospital, The Third 
Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Ruian 325200, PR China. 
Electronic address: 502414011@qq.com.
(3)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325000, PR China. Electronic 
address: cnzjdrc@163.com.

Cigarette smoking is associated with a higher risk of Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
but the underlying mechanisms remain to be clarified. In this study, we aimed to 
examine the effects of cigarette smoking on multiple AD biomarkers among older 
individuals with normal cognition (NC). Among 415 older individuals with NC from 
the Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort, we examined the 
associations between smoking status (non-smokers vs smokers) and global 
cognition, verbal memory, hippocampal volumes, cerebral glucose metabolism and 
CSF AD pathologies. The primary findings of this study were: (1) In NC, smokers 
showed worse performance on verbal memory tests [Rey Auditory Verbal Learning 
Test (RAVLT) total learning score and delayed recall] than non-smokers; (2) 
Compared with non-smokers, smokers had significantly lower HpVR; (3) Smokers, 
relative to non-smokers, demonstrated lower levels of cerebral glucose 
metabolism as measured by FDG-PET; and (4) there were no significant differences 
in CSF AD pathologies (CSF Aβ42, t-tau or p-tau) between non-smokers and 
smokers. Longitudinal studies are needed to investigate the relationship between 
cigarettes smoking and changes in AD-related markers over time. Further, ADNI 
participants were highly educated and predominantly white. This may limit the 
generalizability of our results. In summary, among individuals with NC, 
cigarette smoking was associated with memory impairment, hippocampal atrophy and 
cerebral glucose hypometabolism, but not CSF AD pathologies.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2019.134563
PMID: 31678372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2023 Feb 24;78(2):206-212. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/glac217.

The Mediating Role of Inflammation in the Relationship Between α-Synuclein and 
Cognitive Functioning.

Dabiri S(1), Ramírez Ruiz MI(1), Jean-Louis G(2), Ntekim OE(3), Obisesan TO(4), 
Campbell AL(1), Mwendwa DT(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Howard University, Washington, District of 
Columbia, Washington, DC, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA.
(3)Department of Graduate Nutritional Sciences, Howard University, Washington, 
District of Columbia, Washington, DC, USA.
(4)Division of Geriatrics, Department of Medicine, Howard University Hospital, 
Washington, District of Columbia, Washington, DC, USA.

Accumulating evidence suggests that α-synuclein plays a role in the 
pathophysiology of Alzheimer's disease (AD). This study examined whether 
α-synuclein level in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was associated with cognitive 
functioning among older adults. We also explored whether this relationship was 
mediated by proinflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-6, along with sIL-6R and 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Using a cross-sectional Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI; N = 148) sample, we examined the 
relationship between α-synuclein and participants' performance on Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE) and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale Cognitive 
Subscale (ADAS-Cog 13) at baseline. Mediation analyses were utilized, adjusting 
for age, education, APOEe4, and Geriatric Depression Scale scores. All 
biological markers were measured in CSF. Participants in the current sample were 
58.3% males, 41.7% females, and Caucasian (95.5%); their average education and 
age were 15.5 (standard deviation [SD] = 2.97) and 74.4 (SD = 7.51) years, 
respectively. Higher accumulation of α-synuclein was associated with poorer MMSE 
scores (β = -0.41, standard error [SE] = 1.54, p < .001). This relationship 
appeared to be mediated by VEGF (β = 0.27, SE = 2.15, p = .025) and IL-6r 
(β = 0.22, SE = 1.66, p < .026). In addition, α-synuclein was associated with 
poorer performance on the ADAS-Cog 13 (β = 0.34, p = .005) and mediated by VEGF 
(β = -0.19, SE = 4.13, p = .025) after adjusting for age, education, APOEe4, and 
depressive symptoms. α-Synuclein may serve as an additional biomarker for 
determining poor cognitive functioning. VEGF and IL-6 soluble receptors were 
significant mediators of the relationship between α-synuclein and cognitive 
functioning. If confirmed in prospective analyses, these findings can further 
inform the pathologic cascade and early diagnosis of AD.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glac217
PMCID: PMC10215981
PMID: 36269624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


93. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Jan 28;13:772136. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.772136. 
eCollection 2021.

Intrinsic Brain Activity of Inferior Temporal Region Increased in Prodromal 
Alzheimer's Disease With Hearing Loss.

Hong L(1), Zeng Q(1), Li K(1), Luo X(1), Xu X(1), Liu X(1), Li Z(2), Fu Y(2), 
Wang Y(2), Zhang T(3), Chen Y(2), Liu Z(2), Huang P(1), Zhang M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, The 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Tongde Hospital of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, 
China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Hearing loss (HL) is one of the modifiable risk 
factors for Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the underlying mechanism behind 
HL in AD remains elusive. A possible mechanism is cognitive load hypothesis, 
which postulates that over-processing of degraded auditory signals in the 
auditory cortex leads to deficits in other cognitive functions. Given mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) is a prodromal stage of AD, untangling the 
association between HL and MCI might provide insights for potential mechanism 
behind HL.
METHODS: We included 85 cognitively normal (CN) subjects with no hearing loss 
(NHL), 24 CN with HL, 103 mild cognitive impairment (MCI) patients with NHL, and 
23 MCI with HL from the ADNI database. All subjects underwent resting-state 
functional MRI and neuropsychological scale assessments. Fractional amplitude of 
low-frequency fluctuation (fALFF) was used to reflect spontaneous brain 
activity. The mixed-effects analysis was applied to explore the interactive 
effects between HL and cognitive status (GRF corrected, voxel p-value <0.005, 
cluster p-value < 0.05, two-tailed). Then, the FDG data was included to further 
reflect the regional neuronal abnormalities. Finally, Pearson correlation 
analysis was performed between imaging metrics and cognitive scores to explore 
the clinical significance (Bonferroni corrected, p < 0.05).
RESULTS: The interactive effects primarily located in the left superior temporal 
gyrus (STG) and bilateral inferior temporal gyrus (ITG). Post-hoc analysis 
showed that NC with HL had lower fALFF in bilateral ITG compared to NC with NHL. 
NC with HL had higher fALFF in the left STG and decreased fALFF in bilateral ITG 
compared to MCI with HL. In addition, NC with HL had lower fALFF in the right 
ITG compared to MCI with NHL. Correlation analysis revealed that fALFF was 
associated with MMSE and ADNI-VS, while SUVR was associated with MMSE, MoCA, 
ADNI-EF and ADNI-Lan.
CONCLUSION: HL showed different effects on NC and MCI stages. NC had increased 
spontaneous brain activity in auditory cortex while decreased activity in the 
ITG. Such pattern altered with disease stage changing and manifested as 
decreased activity in auditory cortex along with increased activity in ITG in 
MCI. This suggested that the cognitive load hypothesis may be the underlying 
mechanism behind HL.

Copyright © 2022 Hong, Zeng, Li, Luo, Xu, Liu, Li, Fu, Wang, Zhang, Chen, Liu, 
Huang and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.772136
PMCID: PMC8831745
PMID: 35153717

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


94. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;76(2):691-701. doi: 10.3233/JAD-200108.

Progression of Alzheimer's Disease by Self-Reported Cancer History in the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Fowler ME(1), Triebel KL(2), Cutter GR(3), Schneider LS(4), Kennedy RE(5); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Birmingham, 
AL, USA.
(2)Division of Neuropsychology, Department of Neurology, University of Alabama, 
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Birmingham, 
AL, USA.
(4)University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.
(5)Division of Gerontology, Geriatrics, and Palliative Care, Department of 
Medicine, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cross-sectional studies suggest self-reported cancer history is 
associated with decreased risk of Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, little is 
known about how self-reported cancer affects longitudinal AD progression, the 
primary outcome in clinical trials and observational studies.
OBJECTIVE: To determine self-reported cancer history's effect on longitudinal AD 
progression in an observational study.
METHODS: We utilized data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) to evaluate progression to AD by self-reported all-cancer, breast, 
prostate, colorectal, or non-melanoma skin cancer history. Linear mixed effects 
models were used to examine baseline differences and rates of progression on the 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog) by 
self-reported cancer history. Age at AD onset was examined using consensus 
clinical diagnoses with Cox proportional hazards regression.
RESULTS: Among 1,271 participants, models revealed no significant differences in 
progression over time but did reveal significantly lower baseline ADAS-Cog 
score, indicating better cognition at a given age in those with self-reported 
cancer history. Cox models indicated those with self-reported cancer history had 
significantly later age of AD onset (HR: 0.67, 95% CI: 0.53-0.85) after 
adjustment for covariates.
CONCLUSION: Participants with self-reported cancer history entered ADNI with 
better cognition and later age of AD onset, but progressed similarly to 
participants without such history, indicating differences in AD between those 
with and without self-reported cancer history emerge early in the disease 
course. Such differences in longitudinal progression by self-reported cancer 
history could affect AD trials and observational studies, given the current 
focus on early disease course. Further investigation is warranted with detailed 
longitudinal assessment of cancer and AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-200108
PMCID: PMC7928167
PMID: 32538844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: [Table: see 
text]


95. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;30(2):367-75. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-112117.

Risk classification in mild cognitive impairment patients for developing 
Alzheimer's disease.

Zhou B(1), Nakatani E, Teramukai S, Nagai Y, Fukushima M; Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Translational Research Informatics Center, Foundation for Biomedical Research 
and Innovation, Kobe, Japan.

The objective of this study was to develop new risk classifications for 
conversion to Alzheimer's disease (AD) by comparing the relative reliability of 
classifiers in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). The 397 MCI 
subjects and all baseline data, including characteristics, neuropsychological 
tests, cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and MRI findings in Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), were used for analysis by Cox proportional 
hazard regression, bootstrap sampling, and c-index. Multivariate Cox regression 
analysis revealed the following factors to be associated with increased risk of 
conversion from MCI to AD during the 53-month follow-up period: AVLT 30-minute 
delayed recall, AVLT trial 1, Boston naming, logical delayed recall, 
trail-making B, CDR-sob, ADAS13, the cortical thickness of the right inferior 
temporal lobe (st91ta), and the left hippocampus volume. The combinations of 
ADAS13 at a cutoff point of 15.67 with CDR-sob at 1.5 or with the cortical 
thickness of the right inferior temporal lobe at 2.56 mm3 produced high 
conversion rates of 92.7% (82.4%-100.0%) and 88.8% (77.3%-100.0%), respectively, 
at 48 months. The discriminative ability based on c-index for the proposed 
combination was 0.68. The sample size was estimated as 504 in the group with a 
combination of ADAS13 and CDR-sob whose conversion rate is highest. The 
combination of ADAS13 with CDR-sob at an optimal cutoff point has a high 
reliability in classifying the MCI patients into high- and low-risk conversion 
to AD and will be benefit for patients' assessment and potentially facilitate 
the clinical development of novel therapeutics.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2012-112117
PMID: 22426014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Brief Bioinform. 2023 Mar 19;24(2):bbad073. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbad073.

Integrative analysis of multi-omics and imaging data with incorporation of 
biological information via structural Bayesian factor analysis.

Bao J(1), Chang C(1), Zhang Q(1), Saykin AJ(2), Shen L(1), Long Q(1); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, University of 
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, 19104, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University, 
Indianapolis, 46202, IN, USA.

MOTIVATION: With the rapid development of modern technologies, massive data are 
available for the systematic study of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Though many 
existing AD studies mainly focus on single-modality omics data, multi-omics 
datasets can provide a more comprehensive understanding of AD. To bridge this 
gap, we proposed a novel structural Bayesian factor analysis framework (SBFA) to 
extract the information shared by multi-omics data through the aggregation of 
genotyping data, gene expression data, neuroimaging phenotypes and prior 
biological network knowledge. Our approach can extract common information shared 
by different modalities and encourage biologically related features to be 
selected, guiding future AD research in a biologically meaningful way.
METHOD: Our SBFA model decomposes the mean parameters of the data into a sparse 
factor loading matrix and a factor matrix, where the factor matrix represents 
the common information extracted from multi-omics and imaging data. Our 
framework is designed to incorporate prior biological network information. Our 
simulation study demonstrated that our proposed SBFA framework could achieve the 
best performance compared with the other state-of-the-art factor-analysis-based 
integrative analysis methods.
RESULTS: We apply our proposed SBFA model together with several state-of-the-art 
factor analysis models to extract the latent common information from genotyping, 
gene expression and brain imaging data simultaneously from the ADNI biobank 
database. The latent information is then used to predict the functional 
activities questionnaire score, an important measurement for diagnosis of AD 
quantifying subjects' abilities in daily life. Our SBFA model shows the best 
prediction performance compared with the other factor analysis models.
AVAILABILITY: Code are publicly available at 
https://github.com/JingxuanBao/SBFA.
CONTACT: qlong@upenn.edu.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbad073
PMCID: PMC10387302
PMID: 36882008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Clin Neurosci. 2022 May;99:99-108. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2022.03.004. Epub 2022 
Mar 9.

Comparison of cortical and subcortical structural segmentation methods in 
Alzheimer's disease: A statistical approach.

Zamani J(1), Sadr A(2), Javadi AH(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Electrical Engineering, Iran University of Science and Technology, 
Tehran, Iran.
(2)School of Electrical Engineering, Iran University of Science and Technology, 
Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: sadr@iust.ac.ir.
(3)School of Psychology, University of Kent, Canterbury, UK; School of 
Rehabilitation, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic 
address: a.h.javadi@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Automated segmentation methods are developed to help with the 
segmentation of different brain areas. However, their reliability has yet to be 
fully investigated. To have a more comprehensive understanding of the 
distribution of changes in Alzheimer's disease (AD), as well as investigating 
the reliability of different segmentation methods, in this study we compared 
volumes of cortical and subcortical brain segments, using HIPS, volBrain, CAT 
and BrainSuite automated segmentation methods between AD, mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) and healthy controls (HC).
METHODS: A total of 182 MRI images were taken from the minimal interval 
resonance imaging in Alzheimer's disease (MIRIAD; 22 AD and 22 HC) and the 
Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative database (ADNI; 43 AD, 50 MCI and 45 
HC) datasets. Statistical methods were used to compare different groups as well 
as the correlation between different methods.
RESULTS: The two methods of volBrain and CAT showed a strong correlation 
(p's < 0.035 Bonferroni corrected for multiple comparisons). The two methods, 
however, showed no significant correlation with BrainSuite (p's > 0.820 
Bonferroni corrected). Furthermore, BrainSuite did not follow the same trend as 
the other three methods and only HIPS, volBrain and CAT showed strong conformity 
with the past literature with strong correlation with mini mental state 
examination (MMSE) scores.
CONCLUSION: Our results showed that automated segmentation methods HIPS, 
volBrain and CAT can be used in the classification of HC, AD and MCI. This is an 
indication that such methods can be used to inform researchers and clinicians of 
underlying mechanisms and progression of AD.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2022.03.004
PMID: 35278936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Nutr Health Aging. 2024 Dec 10;29(2):100444. doi: 10.1016/j.jnha.2024.100444. 
Online ahead of print.

Impact of diabetes on the progression of Alzheimer's disease via trajectories of 
amyloid-tau-neurodegeneration (ATN) biomarkers.

Kim EW(1), Kim KY(2), Kim E(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 
03722, Republic of Korea; Department of Nursing, Seoyeong University, Gwangju 
61268, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Seoul Metropolitan Government Seoul National 
University (SMG-SNU) Boramae Medical Center, Seoul National University College 
of Medicine, Seoul 07061, Republic of Korea; Department of Psychiatry, 
Laboratory for Alzheimer's Molecular Psychiatry, Institute of Behavioral Science 
in Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Republic of 
Korea. Electronic address: rlarmsdb@gmail.com.
(3)Graduate School of Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 
03722, Republic of Korea; Department of Psychiatry, Laboratory for Alzheimer's 
Molecular Psychiatry, Institute of Behavioral Science in Medicine, Yonsei 
University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea; Graduate School 
of Medical Science, Brain Korea 21 Project, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea; Metabolism-Dementia Research 
Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Republic of 
Korea. Electronic address: eosu.kim@yonsei.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by the accumulation of 
abnormal proteins, such as β-amyloid and tau, in the brain, which precedes 
cognitive impairment. Although diabetes mellitus (DM) is a well-established risk 
factor for AD, few studies have investigated how the presence of DM affects the 
sequential pathogenesis of AD, specifically within the 
amyloid-tau-neurodegeneration (ATN) and cognition framework.
OBJECTIVES: This study aims to investigate the trajectories of ATN biomarkers in 
relation to the presence of DM in the preclinical and prodromal stages of AD.
DESIGN: Participants with normal cognition (CN) or mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) at baseline were included. Subjects were followed for 12-192 months, with 
neuroimaging and cognitive assessments conducted at every 12 or 24 months.
SETTING: This study utilized data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) database.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 603 participants aged 55-90 years were included, 
comprising 284 CN (25 with DM, 259 without DM) and 319 MCI (39 with DM, 280 
without DM) individuals.
MEASUREMENTS: ATN biomarkers were identified using florbetapir positron emission 
tomography (PET), flortaucipir PET, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
respectively. Cognition was assessed using the Clinical Dementia Rating-Sum of 
Boxes (CDR-SB) and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). Moderation analysis was 
conducted to investigate the effect of DM on the association between ATN 
biomarkers of AD.
RESULTS: Elevated amyloid standardized uptake value ratios (SUVRs) were 
associated with increased tau levels in the hippocampus, and this association 
was significantly enhanced by the presence of DM in MCI participants 
(p = 0.021). DM also strengthened the association between increased tau SUVR 
levels and neurodegeneration (indicated by decreased entorhinal cortical 
volumes; p = 0.005) in those with MCI. Furthermore, DM enhanced the association 
of decreased entorhinal (p = 0.012) and middle temporal cortex (p = 0.031) 
volumes with increased (worsened) CDR-SB scores in MCI participants. However, DM 
did not predict significant longitudinal changes in ATN pathology or cognitive 
decline in CN participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that DM may increase the risk of AD by 
accelerating each step of the A-T-N cascade in the prodromal stage of AD, 
underscoring the importance of DM management in preventing the MCI conversion to 
AD.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jnha.2024.100444
PMID: 39662155


99. Heliyon. 2023 Nov 4;9(11):e21626. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e21626. 
eCollection 2023 Nov.

Application of machine learning in dementia diagnosis: A systematic literature 
review.

Kantayeva G(1), Lima J(1), Pereira AI(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Centre in Digitalization and Intelligent Robotics (CeDRI), Instituto 
Politecnico de Bragança, Bragança, Portugal.

According to the World Health Organization forecast, over 55 million people 
worldwide have dementia, and about 10 million new cases are detected yearly. 
Early diagnosis is essential for patients to plan for the future and deal with 
the disease. Machine Learning algorithms allow us to solve the problems 
associated with early disease detection. This work attempts to identify the 
current relevance of the application of machine learning in dementia prediction 
in the scientific world and suggests open fields for future research. The 
literature review was conducted by combining bibliometric and content analysis 
of articles originating in a period of 20 years in the Scopus database. 
Twenty-seven thousand five hundred twenty papers were identified firstly, of 
which a limited number focused on machine learning in dementia diagnosis. After 
the exclusion process, 202 were selected, and 25 were chosen for analysis. The 
recent increasing interest in the past five years in the theme of machine 
learning in dementia shows that it is a relevant field for research with still 
open questions. The methods used to identify dementia or what features are used 
to identify or predict this disease are explored in this study. The literature 
review revealed that most studies used magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and its 
types as the main feature, accompanied by demographic data such as age, gender, 
and the mini-mental state examination score (MMSE). Data are usually acquired 
from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Classification of 
Alzheimer's disease is more prevalent than prediction of Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (MCI) or their combination. The authors preferred machine learning 
algorithms such as SVM, Ensemble methods, and CNN because of their excellent 
performance and results in previous studies. However, most use not one 
machine-learning technique but a combination of techniques. Despite achieving 
good results in the studies considered, there are new concepts for future 
investigation declared by the authors and suggestions for improvements by 
employing promising methods with potentially significant results.

© 2023 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e21626
PMCID: PMC10663815
PMID: 38027622

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


100. Aging Ment Health. 2022 Oct;26(10):1988-1996. doi: 
10.1080/13607863.2021.1966746. Epub 2021 Aug 19.

Metrological properties of neuropsychological tests for measuring cognitive 
change in individuals with prodromal Alzheimer's disease.

Zhang X(1), Wu Y(1), He Y(1), Ge X(1), Cui J(1), Han H(2), Luo Y(1), Liu L(1), 
Wang Z(1), Yu H(1)(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Statistics, School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, China.
(2)bDepartment of Mathematics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, China.
(3)Shanxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Major Diseases Risk Assessment, Taiyuan, 
China.

OBJECTIVES: In Alzheimer's Disease (AD) research, choosing appropriate method 
for measuring change in cognitive function over time can be challenging. The aim 
for this study was to examine the sensitivity of four neuropsychological tests 
used to measure cognition during the transition from mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) to AD, and the impacts of associated covariates.
METHODS: We enrolled 223 patients with MCI who progressed to AD and had 
completed multiple follow-up assessments in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) database. We constructed nonlinear mixed model for 
multivariate longitudinal data assuming that multiple neuropsychological tests 
would exhibit nonlinear transformation of a common factor in the latent 
cognitive process underlying the progression from MCI to AD.
RESULTS: The Clinical Dementia Rating-Sum of the Boxes (CDR-SB) and Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale (11 items; ADAS-11) were more sensitive to cognitive 
changes in individuals with higher cognitive function, the Functional Activities 
Questionnaire (FAQ) was more sensitive to cognitive changes in individuals with 
middle cognitive function, and the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) was more 
sensitive to cognitive changes in individuals with lower cognitive function. 
Gender (p = 0.0139) and educational level (p = 0.0094) had varying effects on 
different tests, such that men performed better on the FAQ and CDR-SB, and 
individuals with higher educational level tended to perform better on the FAQ 
and MMSE.
CONCLUSIONS: When choosing appropriate neuropsychological tests in cognitive 
measurements, the cognitive functional level of the patient as well as the 
impacts of covariates should be considered.

DOI: 10.1080/13607863.2021.1966746
PMID: 34409904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. IEEE J Transl Eng Health Med. 2022 Nov 4;11:1-12. doi: 
10.1109/JTEHM.2022.3219775. eCollection 2023.

Explainable Tensor Multi-Task Ensemble Learning Based on Brain Structure 
Variation for Alzheimer's Disease Dynamic Prediction.

Zhang Y(1), Liu T(1), Lanfranchi V(1), Yang P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer ScienceThe University of Sheffield Sheffield S10 2TN 
U.K.

Machine learning approaches for predicting Alzheimer's disease (AD) progression 
can substantially assist researchers and clinicians in developing effective AD 
preventive and treatment strategies. This study proposes a novel machine 
learning algorithm to predict the AD progression utilising a multi-task ensemble 
learning approach. Specifically, we present a novel tensor multi-task learning 
(MTL) algorithm based on similarity measurement of spatio-temporal variability 
of brain biomarkers to model AD progression. In this model, the prediction of 
each patient sample in the tensor is set as one task, where all tasks share a 
set of latent factors obtained through tensor decomposition. Furthermore, as 
subjects have continuous records of brain biomarker testing, the model is 
extended to ensemble the subjects' temporally continuous prediction results 
utilising a gradient boosting kernel to find more accurate predictions. We have 
conducted extensive experiments utilising data from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) to evaluate the performance of the proposed 
algorithm and model. Results demonstrate that the proposed model have superior 
accuracy and stability in predicting AD progression compared to benchmarks and 
state-of-the-art multi-task regression methods in terms of the Mini Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) questionnaire and The Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog) cognitive scores. Brain biomarker 
correlation information can be utilised to identify variations in individual 
brain structures and the model can be utilised to effectively predict the 
progression of AD with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data and cognitive 
scores of AD patients at different stages.

DOI: 10.1109/JTEHM.2022.3219775
PMCID: PMC9721355
PMID: 36478772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Jun 7;14:832828. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.832828. 
eCollection 2022.

Automated High-Definition MRI Processing Routine Robustly Detects Longitudinal 
Morphometry Changes in Alzheimer's Disease Patients.

Rechberger S(1), Li Y(2), Kopetzky SJ(2)(3), Butz-Ostendorf M(2)(4); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Viscovery Software GmbH, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Biomax Informatics, Munich, Germany.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany.
(4)Parallel Programming, Department of Computer Science, Technical University of 
Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany.

Longitudinal MRI studies are of increasing importance to document the time 
course of neurodegenerative diseases as well as neuroprotective effects of a 
drug candidate in clinical trials. However, manual longitudinal image 
assessments are time consuming and conventional assessment routines often 
deliver unsatisfying study outcomes. Here, we propose a profound analysis 
pipeline that consists of the following coordinated steps: (1) an automated and 
highly precise image processing stream including voxel and surface based 
morphometry using latest highly detailed brain atlases such as the HCP MMP 1.0 
atlas with 360 cortical ROIs; (2) a profound statistical assessment using a 
multiplicative model of annual percent change (APC); and (3) a multiple testing 
correction adopted from genome-wide association studies that is optimally suited 
for longitudinal neuroimaging studies. We tested this analysis pipeline with 25 
Alzheimer's disease patients against 25 age-matched cognitively normal subjects 
with a baseline and a 1-year follow-up conventional MRI scan from the ADNI-3 
study. Even in this small cohort, we were able to report 22 significant 
measurements after multiple testing correction from SBM (including cortical 
volume, area and thickness) complementing only three statistically significant 
volume changes (left/right hippocampus and left amygdala) found by VBM. A 1-year 
decrease in brain morphometry coincided with an increasing clinical disability 
and cognitive decline in patients measured by MMSE, CDR GLOBAL, FAQ TOTAL and 
NPI TOTAL scores. This work shows that highly precise image assessments, APC 
computation and an adequate multiple testing correction can produce a 
significant study outcome even for small study sizes. With this, automated MRI 
processing is now available and reliable for routine use and clinical trials.

Copyright © 2022 Rechberger, Li, Kopetzky and Butz-Ostendorf.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.832828
PMCID: PMC9211026
PMID: 35747446

Conflict of interest statement: SR was employed by company Viscovery Software 
GmbH. SR, YL, SK, and MB-O were employed with Biomax or subsidiaries of Biomax. 
Viscovery Software GmbH is a one hundred percent subsidiary of Biomax 
Informatics.


103. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2021 Dec 20;111:110393. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2021.110393. Epub 2021 Jul 2.

Genome-wide association study identified INSC gene associated with Trail Making 
Test Part A and Alzheimer's disease related cognitive phenotypes.

Wang K(1), Xu C(2), Smith A(3), Xiao D(4), Navia RO(5), Lu Y(6), Xie C(7), 
Piamjariyakul U(8); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Health, School of Nursing, Health Sciences 
Center, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA. Electronic address: 
keskeng.wang@hsc.wvu.edu.
(2)Department of Health and Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Affairs, 
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, Brownsville, TX 78520, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, Morsani College of 
Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33613, USA.
(4)Department of STEM, School of Arts and Sciences, Regis College, Weston, MA 
02493, USA; Neuroimaging Center, McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA 02478, USA; School 
of Arts and Sciences, MCPHS University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine and Rockefeller Neuroscience Institute, West Virginia 
University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, 
Marshall University, Huntington, WV 25755, USA.
(7)Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Department of Environmental 
Health, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.
(8)School of Nursing, Health Sciences Center, West Virginia University, 
Morgantown, WV 26506, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Trail Making Test (TMT) Part A (TMT-A) is a good measure of 
performance on cognitive processing speed. This study aimed to perform a 
genome-wide association study of TMT-A in Alzheimer's disease (AD).
METHODS: A total of 757 individuals with TMT-A phenotypes and 620,901 single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were extracted from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative 1 (ADNI-1) cohort. AD related cognitive phenotypes 
include TMT-A, TMT-B, Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ), Clinical 
Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB), and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-Cognitive Subscale 13 (ADAS13). Multivariable linear regression analysis 
of TMT-A was conducted using PLINK software. The most TMT-A associated gene was 
tested with Color Trails Test 1 Form A (CTTA), a culturally fair analog of the 
TMT-A. Functional annotation of SNPs was performed using the RegulomeDB and 
Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) databases.
RESULTS: The best signal with TMT-A was rs1108010 (p = 4.34 × 10-8) at 11p15.2 
within INSC gene, which was also associated with TMT-B, FAQ, CDR-SB, and ADAS13 
(p = 2.47 × 10-4, 8.56 × 10-3, 0.0127 and 0.0188, respectively). Furthermore, 
suggestive loci were identified such as FOXD2 and CLTA with TMT-A, GBP1/GBP3 
with TMT-B, GRIK2 with FAQ, BAALC and CCDC146 with CDR-SB, BAALC and NKAIN2 with 
ADAS13. Additionally, the best SNP within INSC associated with CTTA was 
rs7931705 (p = 6.15 × 10-5). Several SNPs had significant eQTLs using GTEx.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified several genes/loci associated with TMT-A and AD 
related phenotypes. These findings offer the potential for new insights into the 
pathogenesis of cognitive function and Alzheimer's disease.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2021.110393
PMID: 34224794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2020;17(7):635-657. doi: 10.2174/1567205017666201008105429.

Modelling Decline in Cognition to Decline in Function in Alzheimer's Disease.

Karcher H(1), Savelieva M(2), Qi L(3), Hummel N(4), Caputo A(2), Risson V(2), 
Capkun G(5), Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Vice President, Access Consulting, Modeling & Simulation Unit Head, Parexel, 
Arnold Böcklin-Str. 29, 4051 Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Analytica Laser, Certara Company, Paris, France.
(4)Analytica Laser, Certara Company, Lörrach, Germany.
(5)Novartis Oncology, Basel, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVES: The study aimed to evaluate and quantify the temporal link between 
cognitive and functional decline, and assess the impact of the apolipoprotein E4 
(APOE-e4) genotype on Alzheimer's disease (AD) progression.
METHODS: A nonlinear mixed-effects Emax model was developed using longitudinal 
data from 659 patients with dementia due to AD sourced from the Alzheimer's 
disease neuroimaging initiative (ADNI) database. A cognitive decline model was 
first built using a cognitive subscale of the AD assessment scale (delayed word 
recall) as the endpoint, followed by a functional decline model, using the 
functional assessment questionnaire (FAQ) as the endpoint. Individual and 
population cognitive decline from the first model drove a functional decline in 
the second model. The impact of the APOE-e4 genotype status on the dynamics of 
AD progression was evaluated using the model.
RESULTS: Mixed-effects Emax models adequately quantified population average and 
individual disease trajectories. The model captured a higher initial cognitive 
impairment and final functional impairment in APOE-e4 carriers than 
non-carriers. The age at cognitive decline and diagnosis of dementia due to AD 
was significantly lower in APOE-e4 carriers than that of non-carriers. The 
average [standard deviation] time shift between cognitive and functional 
decline, i.e. the time span between half of the maximum cognitive decline and 
half of the maximum functional decline, was estimated as 1.5 [1.6] years.
CONCLUSION: The present analysis quantifies the temporal link between a 
cognitive and functional decline in AD progression at the population and 
individual level, and provides information about the potential benefits of 
pre-clinical AD treatments on both cognition and function.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1567205017666201008105429
PMID: 33032508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Jun 30;14:848180. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.848180. 
eCollection 2022.

Microglial Activation, Tau Pathology, and Neurodegeneration Biomarkers Predict 
Longitudinal Cognitive Decline in Alzheimer's Disease Continuum.

Chen YH(1), Lin RR(1), Huang HF(2), Xue YY(1), Tao QQ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Research Center of Neurology in Second Affiliated 
Hospital, and Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology of Zhejiang Province, 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Lishui Hospital, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, Lishui, China.

PURPOSE: Biomarkers used for predicting longitudinal cognitive change in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) continuum are still elusive. Tau pathology, 
neuroinflammation, and neurodegeneration are the leading candidate predictors. 
We aimed to determine these three aspects of biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) and plasma to predict longitudinal cognition status using Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 430 subjects including, 96 cognitive normal 
(CN) with amyloid β (Aβ)-negative, 54 CN with Aβ-positive, 195 mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) with Aβ-positive, and 85 AD with amyloid-positive (Aβ-positive 
are identified by CSF Aβ42/Aβ40 < 0.138). Aβ burden was evaluated by CSF and 
plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio; tau pathology was evaluated by CSF and plasma 
phosphorylated-tau (p-tau181); microglial activation was measured by CSF soluble 
TREM2 (sTREM2) and progranulin (PGRN); neurodegeneration was measured by CSF and 
plasma t-tau and structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); cognition was 
examined annually over the subsequent 8 years using the Alzheimer's Disease 
Assessment Scale Cognition 13-item scale (ADAS13) and Mini-Mental State Exam 
(MMSE). Linear mixed-effects models (LME) were applied to assess the correlation 
between biomarkers and longitudinal cognition decline, as well as their effect 
size on the prediction of longitudinal cognitive decline.
RESULTS: Baseline CSF Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio was decreased in MCI and AD compared to 
CN, while CSF p-tau181 and t-tau increased. Baseline CSF sTREM2 and PGRN did not 
show any differences in MCI and AD compared to CN. Baseline brain volumes 
(including the hippocampal, entorhinal, middle temporal lobe, and whole-brain) 
decreased in MCI and AD groups. For the longitudinal study, there were 
significant interaction effects of CSF p-tau181 × time, plasma p-tau181 × time, 
CSF sTREM2 × time, and brain volumes × time, indicating CSF, and plasma 
p-tau181, CSF sTREM2, and brain volumes could predict longitudinal cognition 
deterioration rate. CSF sTREM2, CSF, and plasma p-tau181 had similar medium 
prediction effects, while brain volumes showed stronger effects in predicting 
cognition decline.
CONCLUSION: Our study reported that baseline CSF sTREM2, CSF, and plasma 
p-tau181, as well as structural MRI, could predict longitudinal cognitive 
decline in subjects with positive AD pathology. Plasma p-tau181 can be used as a 
relatively noninvasive reliable biomarker for AD longitudinal cognition decline 
prediction.

Copyright © 2022 Chen, Lin, Huang, Xue and Tao.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.848180
PMCID: PMC9280990
PMID: 35847667

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


106. PLoS Comput Biol. 2018 Sep 14;14(9):e1006376. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006376. 
eCollection 2018 Sep.

Modeling and prediction of clinical symptom trajectories in Alzheimer's disease 
using longitudinal data.

Bhagwat N(1)(2)(3), Viviano JD(3), Voineskos AN(3)(4), Chakravarty MM(1)(2)(5); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Computational Brain Anatomy Laboratory, Brain Imaging Center, Douglas Mental 
Health University Institute, Verdun, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Research Lab, Campbell Family 
Mental Health Research Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Biological and Biomedical Engineering, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Computational models predicting symptomatic progression at the individual level 
can be highly beneficial for early intervention and treatment planning for 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Individual prognosis is complicated by many factors 
including the definition of the prediction objective itself. In this work, we 
present a computational framework comprising machine-learning techniques for 1) 
modeling symptom trajectories and 2) prediction of symptom trajectories using 
multimodal and longitudinal data. We perform primary analyses on three cohorts 
from Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), and a replication 
analysis using subjects from Australian Imaging, Biomarker & Lifestyle Flagship 
Study of Ageing (AIBL). We model the prototypical symptom trajectory classes 
using clinical assessment scores from mini-mental state exam (MMSE) and 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS-13) at nine timepoints spanned over 
six years based on a hierarchical clustering approach. Subsequently we predict 
these trajectory classes for a given subject using magnetic resonance (MR) 
imaging, genetic, and clinical variables from two timepoints (baseline + 
follow-up). For prediction, we present a longitudinal Siamese neural-network 
(LSN) with novel architectural modules for combining multimodal data from two 
timepoints. The trajectory modeling yields two (stable and decline) and three 
(stable, slow-decline, fast-decline) trajectory classes for MMSE and ADAS-13 
assessments, respectively. For the predictive tasks, LSN offers highly accurate 
performance with 0.900 accuracy and 0.968 AUC for binary MMSE task and 0.760 
accuracy for 3-way ADAS-13 task on ADNI datasets, as well as, 0.724 accuracy and 
0.883 AUC for binary MMSE task on replication AIBL dataset.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006376
PMCID: PMC6157905
PMID: 30216352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


107. Ther Adv Neurol Disord. 2022 Nov 19;15:17562864221138154. doi: 
10.1177/17562864221138154. eCollection 2022.

Functional MRI and ApoE4 genotype for predicting cognitive decline in 
amyloid-positive individuals.

Zhu JD(1), Huang CW(2), Chang HI(2), Tsai SJ(1)(3)(4), Huang SH(5), Hsu SW(6), 
Lee CC(6), Chen HJ(5), Chang CC(7), Yang AC(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Brain Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Neurology, Cognition and Aging Center, Institute for 
Translational Research in Biomedicine, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, 
Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang 
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(6)Department of NeuroRadiology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang 
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(7)Cognition and Aging Center, Institute for Translational Research in 
Biomedicine, Department of Neurology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, 
Chang Gung University College of Medicine, No. 123 Ta-Pei Road, Niau-Sung 
District, Kaohsiung 833, Taiwan.
(8)Institute of Brain Science/Digital Medicine and Smart Healthcare Research 
Center, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, No. 155, Sec. 2, Linong 
Street, Beitou District, Taipei 112, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Medical Research, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: In light of advancements in machine learning techniques, many 
studies have implemented machine learning approaches combined with data measures 
to predict and classify Alzheimer's disease. Studies that predicted cognitive 
status with longitudinal follow-up of amyloid-positive individuals remain 
scarce, however.
OBJECTIVE: We developed models based on voxel-wise functional connectivity (FC) 
density mapping and the presence of the ApoE4 genotype to predict whether 
amyloid-positive individuals would experience cognitive decline after 1 year.
METHODS: We divided 122 participants into cognitive decline and stable cognition 
groups based on the participants' change rates in Mini-Mental State Examination 
scores. In addition, we included 68 participants from Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database as an external validation data set. 
Subsequently, we developed two classification models: the first model included 
99 voxels, and the second model included 99 voxels and the ApoE4 genotype as 
features to train the models by Wide Neural Network algorithm with fivefold 
cross-validation and to predict the classes in the hold-out test and ADNI data 
sets.
RESULTS: The results revealed that both models demonstrated high accuracy in 
classifying the two groups in the hold-out test data set. The model for FC 
demonstrated good performance, with a mean F 1-score of 0.86. The model for FC 
combined with the ApoE4 genotype achieved superior performance, with a mean F 
1-score of 0.90. In the ADNI data set, the two models demonstrated stable 
performances, with mean F 1-scores of 0.77 in the first and second models.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that the proposed models exhibited promising 
accuracy for predicting cognitive status after 1 year in amyloid-positive 
individuals. Notably, the combination of FC and the ApoE4 genotype increased 
prediction accuracy. These findings can assist clinicians in predicting changes 
in cognitive status in individuals with a high risk of Alzheimer's disease and 
can assist future studies in developing precise treatment and prevention 
strategies.

© The Author(s), 2022.

DOI: 10.1177/17562864221138154
PMCID: PMC9677312
PMID: 36419870

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.


108. Alzheimers Dement. 2015 Apr;11(4):404-14. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.03.008. Epub 
2014 Jul 9.

Development of a straightforward and sensitive scale for MCI and early AD 
clinical trials.

Huang Y(1), Ito K(2), Billing CB Jr(3), Anziano RJ(2); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Pfizer, Inc., Groton, CT, USA. Electronic address: yifan.huang@pfizer.com.
(2)Pfizer, Inc., Groton, CT, USA.
(3)Pfizer, Inc., Groton, CT, USA; SystaMedic, Inc., Groton, CT, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although the Clinical Dementia Rating Scale-Sum of Boxes score 
(CDR-SB) is a widely accepted and commonly used global scale, validated clinical 
endpoints of cognitive changes are unavailable in the predementia stages of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), and a new clinical assessment with reliability and 
sensitivity is needed in the mild cognitive impairment (MCI) population.
METHODS: Using Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)-1/GO data, 
signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) were calculated to quantify the sensitivity of a 
measure for detecting disease progression and hypothetical treatment effects. 
All possible combinations of selected sensitive measures were assessed for 
developing composite scores. The analyses were performed in the MCI population 
and subpopulations enriched by apolipoprotein E4 (APOE ε4), hippocampal volume, 
and cerebrospinal fluid β-amyloid.
RESULTS: The best composite score was "Word Recall + Delayed Word Recall + 
Orientation + CDR-SB + FAQ", more sensitive than 13-item Alzheimer's Disease 
Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale or CDR-SB.
CONCLUSION: The proposed composite score derived from the existing clinical 
endpoints demonstrated higher sensitivity in the MCI population and is easy to 
implement and standardize across studies.

Copyright © 2015 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.03.008
PMID: 25022537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Brain Imaging Behav. 2012 Dec;6(4):584-98. doi: 10.1007/s11682-012-9180-5.

Cortical signatures of cognition and their relationship to Alzheimer's disease.

Gross AL(1), Manly JJ, Pa J, Johnson JK, Park LQ, Mitchell MB, Melrose RJ, 
Inouye SK, McLaren DG; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner M, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Liu 
E, Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, Gamst A, Thomas RG, Donohue M, 
Walter S, Gessert D, Sather T, Beckett L, Harvey D, Gamst A, Donohue M, Kornak 
J, Jack CR Jr, Dale A, Bernstein M, Felmlee J, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, 
Alexander G, DeCarli C, Jagust W, Bandy D, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen 
K, Mathis C, Morris J, Cairns NJ, Taylor-Reinwald L, Trojanowki JQ, Shaw L, Lee 
VM, Korecka M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen 
L, Kachaturian Z, Frank R, Snyder PJ, Molchan S, Kaye J, Quinn J, Lind B, Dolen 
S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Heidebrink JL, 
Lord JL, Petersen R, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Chowdhury M, Stern 
Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Morris JC, Ances B, Carroll M, Leon S, Mintun MA, 
Schneider S, Marson D, Griffith R, Clark D, Grossman H, Mitsis E, Romirowsky A, 
deToledo-Morrell L, Shah RC, Duara R, Varon D, Roberts P, Albert M, Onyike C, 
Kielb S, Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, Glodzik L, De Santi S, Doraiswamy P, Petrella 
JR, Coleman R, Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk D, Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, 
Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein BS, Martin K, Makino 
KM, Ismail M, Brand C, Mulnard RA, Thai G, Mc-Adams-Ortiz C, Womack K, Mathews 
D, Quiceno M, Diaz-Arrastia R, King R, Weiner M, Martin-Cook K, DeVous M, Levey 
AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Anderson HS, Swerdlow RH, Apostolova L, Lu PH, 
Bartzokis G, Silverman DH, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Johnson H, Farlow MR, 
Hake AM, Matthews BR, Herring S, van Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Chertkow H, 
Bergman H, Hosein C, Black S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GY, Feldman H, 
Mudge B, Assaly M, Kertesz A, Rogers J, Trost D, Bernick C, Munic D, Kerwin D, 
Mesulam MM, Lipowski K, Wu CK, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, 
Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall G, Frey M, 
Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh M, Belden C, 
Jacobson S, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, Obisesan TO, 
Wolday S, Bwayo SK, Lerner A, Hudson L, Ogrocki P, Fletcher E, Carmichael O, 
Olichney J, DeCarli C, Kittur S, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana 
S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, Tariot P, Fleisher A, Reeder S, 
Bates V, Capote H, Rainka M, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, 
Brown AD, Pearlson GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Saykin AJ, Santulli RB, Schwartz ES, 
Sink KM, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Querfurth H, Tremont G, 
Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Mintzer J, Flynn Longmire 
C, Spicer K, Finger E, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, Drost D.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Aging Research, Harvard Medical School, Hebrew SeniorLife, 1200 
Centre Street, Rm. 634, Boston, MA, USA. aldengross@hsl.harvard.edu

Recent changes in diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer's disease (AD) state that 
biomarkers can enhance certainty in a diagnosis of AD. In the present study, we 
combined cognitive function and brain morphology, a potential imaging biomarker, 
to predict conversion from mild cognitive impairment to AD. We identified four 
biomarkers, or cortical signatures of cognition (CSC), from regressions of 
cortical thickness on neuropsychological factors representing memory, executive 
function/processing speed, language, and visuospatial function among 
participants in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). 
Neuropsychological factor scores were created from a previously validated 
multidimensional factor structure of the neuropsychological battery in ADNI. 
Mean thickness of each CSC at the baseline study visit was used to evaluate risk 
of conversion to clinical AD among participants with mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) and rate of decline on the Clinical Dementia Rating Scale Sum of Boxes 
(CDR-SB) score. Of 307 MCI participants, 119 converted to AD. For all 
domain-specific CSC, a one standard deviation thinner cortical thickness was 
associated with an approximately 50% higher hazard of conversion and an increase 
of approximately 0.30 points annually on the CDR-SB. In combined models with a 
domain-specific CSC and neuropsychological factor score, both CSC and factor 
scores predicted conversion to AD and increasing clinical severity. The present 
study indicated that factor scores and CSCs for memory and language both 
significantly predicted risk of conversion to AD and accelerated deterioration 
in dementia severity. We conclude that predictive models are best when they 
utilize both neuropsychological measures and imaging biomarkers.

DOI: 10.1007/s11682-012-9180-5
PMCID: PMC3553578
PMID: 22718430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;62(2):745-756. doi: 10.3233/JAD-170834.

Assessment of the Genetic Architecture of Alzheimer's Disease Risk in Rate of 
Memory Decline.

Del-Aguila JL(1)(2), Fernández MV(1)(2), Schindler S(3)(4), Ibanez L(1)(2), 
Deming Y(1)(2), Ma S(1)(2), Saef B(1)(2), Black K(1)(2), Budde J(1)(2), Norton 
J(1)(2), Chasse R(1)(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI); 
Harari O(1), Goate A(5), Xiong C(3), Morris JC(3)(4), Cruchaga C(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO, USA.
(2)Hope Center for Neurological Disorders, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(3)Knight Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, USA.
(5)Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Many genetic studies for Alzheimer's disease (AD) have been focused on the 
identification of common genetic variants associated with AD risk and not on 
other aspects of the disease, such as age at onset or rate of dementia 
progression. There are multiple approaches to untangling the genetic 
architecture of these phenotypes. We hypothesized that the genetic architecture 
of rate of progression is different than the risk for developing AD dementia. To 
test this hypothesis, we used longitudinal clinical data from ADNI and the 
Knight-ADRC at Washington University, and we calculated PRS (polygenic risk 
score) based on the IGAP study to compare the genetic architecture of AD risk 
and dementia progression. Dementia progression was measured by the change of 
Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDR)-SB per year. Out of the 21 loci for 
AD risk, no association with the rate of dementia progression was found. The PRS 
rate was significantly associated with the rate of dementia progression 
(β= 0.146, p = 0.03). In the case of rare variants, TREM2 (β= 0.309, p = 0.02) 
was also associated with the rate of dementia progression. TREM2 variant 
carriers showed a 23% faster rate of dementia compared with non-variant 
carriers. In conclusion, our results indicate that the recently identified 
common and rare variants for AD susceptibility have a limited impact on the rate 
of dementia progression in AD patients.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-170834
PMCID: PMC5989565
PMID: 29480181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflict of interest


111. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;47(1):205-14. doi: 10.3233/JAD-142508.

Cognitive Impairment Precedes and Predicts Functional Impairment in Mild 
Alzheimer's Disease.

Liu-Seifert H(1), Siemers E(1), Price K(1), Han B(1), Selzler KJ(1), Henley 
D(1)(2), Sundell K(1), Aisen P(3), Cummings J(4), Raskin J(5), Mohs R(1); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Lilly Research Laboratories, Lilly Corporate Center, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(2)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 
CA, USA.
(4)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Las Vegas, NV, USA.
(5)Eli Lilly Canada, Toronto, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The temporal relationship of cognitive deficit and functional 
impairment in Alzheimer's disease (AD) is not well characterized. Recent 
analyses suggest cognitive decline predicts subsequent functional decline 
throughout AD progression.
OBJECTIVE: To better understand the relationship between cognitive and 
functional decline in mild AD using autoregressive cross-lagged (ARCL) panel 
analyses in several clinical trials.
METHODS: Data included placebo patients with mild AD pooled from two 
multicenter, double-blind, Phase 3 solanezumab (EXPEDITION/2) or semagacestat 
(IDENTITY/2) studies, and from AD patients participating in the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Cognitive and functional outcomes were 
assessed using AD Assessment Scale-Cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog), AD Cooperative 
Study-Activities of Daily Living instrumental subscale (ADCS-iADL), or 
Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ), respectively. ARCL panel analyses 
evaluated relationships between cognitive and functional impairment over time.
RESULTS: In EXPEDITION, ARCL panel analyses demonstrated cognitive scores 
significantly predicted future functional impairment at 5 of 6 time points, 
while functional scores predicted subsequent cognitive scores in only 1 of 6 
time points. Data from IDENTITY and ADNI programs yielded consistent results 
whereby cognition predicted subsequent function, but not vice-versa.
CONCLUSIONS: Analyses from three databases indicated cognitive decline precedes 
and predicts subsequent functional decline in mild AD dementia, consistent with 
previously proposed hypotheses, and corroborate recent publications using 
similar methodologies. Cognitive impairment may be used as a predictor of future 
functional impairment in mild AD dementia and can be considered a critical 
target for prevention strategies to limit future functional decline in the 
dementia process.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-142508
PMCID: PMC4923754
PMID: 26402769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2024 Oct 26;16(1):238. doi: 10.1186/s13195-024-01602-9.

Association of modifiable risk factors with progression to dementia in relation 
to amyloid and tau pathology.

Huszár Z(1)(2), Solomon A(3)(4)(5), Engh MA(1), Koszovácz V(2), Terebessy T(1), 
Molnár Z(1)(6)(7), Hegyi P(1)(8)(9)(10), Horváth A(1)(11)(12)(13), Mangialasche 
F(14)(15), Kivipelto M(4)(5)(14)(15), Csukly G(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Translational Medicine, Semmelweis University, Üllői Út 26, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Semmelweis University, Balassa U. 
6, Budapest, 1083, Hungary.
(3)Institute of Clinical Medicine/Neurology, University of Eastern Finland, 
Kuopio, Finland.
(4)Division of Clinical Geriatrics, Center for Alzheimer Research, Department of 
Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(5)Ageing Epidemiology Research Unit, School of Public Health, Imperial College 
London, London, UK.
(6)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Therapy, Semmelweis University, 
Üllői 78/A, Budapest, Hungary.
(7)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Therapy, Poznan University of 
Medical Sciences, 49 Przybyszewskiego St, Poznan, Poland.
(8)Institute for Translational Medicine, Medical School, University of Pécs, 
Szigeti U. 12, Pécs, Hungary.
(9)Institute of Pancreatic Diseases, Semmelweis University, Tömő 25-29, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(10)Translational Pancreatology Research Group, Interdisciplinary Centre of 
Excellence for Research Development and Innovation, University of Szeged, 6728, 
Szeged, Hungary.
(11)Neurocognitive Research Center, National Institute of Mental Health, 
Neurology, and Neurosurgery, Budapest, Hungary.
(12)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Semmelweis University, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(13)Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Hungarian Research Network, Budapest, 
Hungary.
(14)Institute of Public Health and Clinical Nutrition, University of Eastern 
Finland, Kuopio, Finland.
(15)Theme Inflammation and Aging, Medical Unit Aging, Karolinska University 
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(16)Centre for Translational Medicine, Semmelweis University, Üllői Út 26, 
Budapest, Hungary. csukly.gabor@semmelweis.hu.
(17)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Semmelweis University, Balassa 
U. 6, Budapest, 1083, Hungary. csukly.gabor@semmelweis.hu.

BACKGROUND: Dementia preventive interventions targeting multiple modifiable risk 
factors are a promising approach. However, the impact of modifiable risk factors 
in the presence of beta-amyloid or phosphorylated-tau (p-tau) pathology is 
unclear.
METHODS: The objective of the study was to examine the role of modifiable risk 
factors (vascular factors, depression, and smoking) in the progression to mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) or dementia among 434 cognitively unimpaired (CU) and 
611 individuals with MCI from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) database. Vascular risk factors were summarized with the Cardiovascular 
Risk Factors, Aging, and Dementia (CAIDE) score, dichotomized into higher versus 
lower risk. Depression and smoking (yes/no) were categorised according to 
medical history or current symptoms. Analyses were stratified by beta-amyloid 
negative (A-) and positive (A +), p-tau negative (T-) and positive (T +), or 
beta-amyloid and p-tau negative (A-T-) and positive (A + T +) biomarker status. 
Cox proportional hazard models were adjusted for age, sex, education, baseline 
MMSE score, baseline hippocampal volume and ApoE4 carrier status.
RESULTS: Higher CAIDE score was associated with increased risk of progression to 
all-cause dementia in most MCI subgroups: adjusted hazard ratios (aHR) [95% CI] 
were 3.1 [1.43; 6.53] in the A- subgroup, 1.7 [1.20-2.27] in T + , 2.6 
[1.06-6.59] in A-T-, and 1.6 [1.15-2.22] in the A + T + subgroup. Smoking 
(yes/no) was associated with increased dementia aHR in the A + MCI subgroup: 1.6 
[1.07-2.34]. Depression increased dementia aHR in the T + MCI subgroup: 1.5 
[1.06-2.02]. No significant associations were found in the CU biomarker 
subgroups.
CONCLUSION: Addressing modifiable risk factors carries an important potential 
for reducing the risk of dementia even after the onset of Alzheimer's pathology. 
Knowledge of biomarker status can further optimize prevention strategies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-024-01602-9
PMCID: PMC11515263
PMID: 39462394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


113. PLoS One. 2019 Feb 25;14(2):e0212435. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0212435. 
eCollection 2019.

Evaluating trajectories of episodic memory in normal cognition and mild 
cognitive impairment: Results from ADNI.

Ding X(1), Charnigo RJ(2)(3), Schmitt FA(4)(5), Kryscio RJ(2)(3)(4), Abner 
EL(3)(4)(6); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Western Kentucky University, Department of Public Health, Bowling Green, 
Kentucky, United States of America.
(2)University of Kentucky, Department of Statistics, Lexington, Kentucky, United 
States of America.
(3)University of Kentucky, Department of Biostatistics, Lexington, Kentucky, 
United States of America.
(4)University of Kentucky, Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, Lexington, Kentucky, 
United States of America.
(5)University of Kentucky, Department of Neurology, Lexington, Kentucky, United 
States of America.
(6)University of Kentucky, Department of Epidemiology, Lexington, Kentucky, 
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Memory assessment is a key factor for the diagnosis of cognitive 
impairment. However, memory performance over time may be quite heterogeneous 
within diagnostic groups.
METHOD: To identify latent trajectories in memory performance and their 
associated risk factors, we analyzed data from Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) participants who were classified either as cognitively normal 
or as Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) at baseline and were administered the Rey 
Auditory Verbal Learning test (RAVLT) for up to 9 years. Group-based trajectory 
modeling on the 30-minute RAVLT delayed recall score was applied separately to 
the two baseline diagnostic groups.
RESULTS: There were 219 normal subjects with mean age 75.9 (range from 59.9 to 
89.6) and 52.5% male participants, and 372 MCI subjects with mean age 74.8 
(range from 55.1 to 89.3) and 63.7% male participants included in the analysis. 
For normal subjects, six trajectories were identified. Trajectories were 
classified into three types, determined by the shape, each of which may comprise 
more than one trajectory: stable (~30% of subjects), curvilinear decline (~ 
28%), and linear decline (~ 42%). Notably, none of the normal subjects assigned 
to the stable stratum progressed to dementia during the study period. In 
contrast, all trajectories identified for the MCI group tended to decline, 
although some participants were later re-diagnosed with normal cognition. Age, 
sex, and education were significantly associated with trajectory membership for 
both diagnostic groups, while APOE ɛ4 was only significantly associated with 
trajectories among MCI participants.
CONCLUSION: Memory trajectory is a strong indicator of dementia risk. If likely 
trajectory of memory performance can be identified early, such work may allow 
clinicians to monitor or predict progression of individual patient cognition. 
This work also shows the importance of longitudinal cognitive testing and 
monitoring.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0212435
PMCID: PMC6389289
PMID: 30802256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Although the data collection and sharing of the 
ADNI project were supported by some commercial funding, the data used in this 
project were retrieved from an open-access database, and data obtained were 
de-identified. The authors confirm that this does not alter their adherence to 
PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


114. J Alzheimers Dis. 2024;99(3):953-963. doi: 10.3233/JAD-231426.

Simplifying Alzheimer's Disease Monitoring: A Novel Machine-Learning Approach to 
Estimate the Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Box Changes Using the Mini-Mental 
State Examination and Functional Activities Questionnaire.

Sato K(1)(2), Niimi Y(2)(3), Ihara R(4), Suzuki K(5), Iwata A(4), Iwatsubo 
T(1)(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; Japanese Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Unit for Early and Exploratory Clinical Development, The University of Tokyo 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Healthcare Economics and Health Policy, Graduate School of 
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute for Geriatrics and 
Gerontology, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Division of Neurology, Internal Medicine, National Defense Medical College, 
Saitama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Primary outcome measure in the clinical trials of disease modifying 
therapy (DMT) drugs for Alzheimer's disease (AD) has often been evaluated by 
Clinical Dementia Rating sum of boxes (CDRSB). However, CDR testing requires 
specialized training and 30-50 minutes to complete, not being suitable for daily 
clinical practice.
OBJECTIVE: Herein, we proposed a machine-learning method to estimate CDRSB 
changes using simpler cognitive/functional batteries (Mini-Mental State 
Examination [MMSE] and Functional Activities Questionnaire [FAQ]), to replace 
CDR testing.
METHODS: Baseline data from 944 ADNI and 171 J-ADNI amyloid-positive 
participants were used to build machine-learning models predicting annualized 
CDRSB changes between visits, based on MMSE and FAQ scores. Prediction 
performance was evaluated with mean absolute error (MAE) and R2 comparing 
predicted to actual rmDeltaCDRSB/rmDeltayear. We further assessed whether 
decline in cognitive function surpassing particular thresholds could be 
identified using the predicted rmDeltaCDRSB/rmDeltayear.
RESULTS: The models achieved the minimum required prediction errors (MAE < 1.0) 
and satisfactory prediction accuracy (R2>0.5) for mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) patients for changes in CDRSB over periods of 18 months or longer. 
Predictions of annualized CDRSB progression>0.5, >1.0, or >1.5 demonstrated a 
consistent performance (i.e., Matthews correlation coefficient>0.5). These 
results were largely replicated in the J-ADNI case predictions.
CONCLUSIONS: Our method effectively predicted MCI patient deterioration in the 
CDRSB based solely on MMSE and FAQ scores. It may aid routine practice for 
disease-modifying therapy drug efficacy evaluation, without necessitating CDR 
testing at every visit.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-231426
PMID: 38759009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;90(1):263-270. doi: 10.3233/JAD-220397.

Mini-Mental State Examination and Montreal Cognitive Assessment as Tools for 
Following Cognitive Changes in Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
Participants.

Wang G(1), Estrella A(2), Hakim O(2), Milazzo P(2), Patel S(2), Pintagro C(2), 
Li D(3), Zhao R(4), Vance DE(5), Li W(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)School of Health Professions, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL, USA.
(3)The College, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)School of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(5)School of Nursing, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA) are two commonly used cognitive screening and diagnostic 
tools.
OBJECTIVE: Our goal was to assess their efficacy for monitoring cognitive 
changes, as well as the correlation between the two tests.
METHODS: At baseline, participants in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) were divided into four groups based on their cognitive 
diagnoses: healthy control (HC), early mild cognitive impairment (EMCI), late 
mild cognitive impairment (LMCI), and Alzheimer's disease (AD). MMSE or MoCA 
scores were compared among the four groups using an analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
model with repeated measures with post-hoc Bonferroni correction. For those 
participants who had both MMSE and MoCA assessments done, a Pearson correlation 
analysis was performed between the two assessments for each visit.
RESULTS: The MMSE scores were significantly different among the four groups at 
baseline, which was true for each of the three annual follow-up visits. By 
contrast, the MoCA scores were not significantly different between HC and EMCI 
groups at either baseline or any of the follow-up visits. For participants with 
a diagnosis of LMCI, the cognitive performance deteriorated in a linear manner 
12 months after the baseline, which was independent of MMSE or MoCA. At last, 
the MMSE scores were moderately related to MoCA scores, which got stronger along 
with the time of follow-up.
CONCLUSION: MMSE and MoCA are comparable as cognitive assessment tools to 
monitor cognitive changes. In addition, the measurements of MMSE and MoCA are 
moderately correlated for the follow-up visits.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-220397
PMID: 36093696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Neurology. 2022 Apr 12;98(15):e1534-e1544. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200120. 
Epub 2022 Mar 30.

Association of Diabetes and Hypertension With Brain Structural Integrity and 
Cognition in the Boston Puerto Rican Health Study Cohort.

Guan Y(1), Ebrahimzadeh SA(1), Cheng CH(1), Chen W(1), Leung T(1), Bigornia 
S(1), Palacios N(1), Garelnabi MO(1), Scott T(1), Bhadelia R(1), Tucker KL(1), 
Koo BB(1); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology (Y.G., C.-h.C., W.C., T.L., 
B.-B.K.), Boston University School of Medicine; Department of Radiology (S.A.E., 
R.B.), Neuroradiology Section, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA; Department of Agriculture, Nutrition, and Food 
Systems (S.B.), College of Life Sciences and Agriculture, University of New 
Hampshire, Durham; Departments of Public Health (N.P., M.O.G.) and Biomedical 
and Nutritional Sciences (K.L.T.), Zuckerberg College of Health Sciences, and 
Center for Population Health (N.P., K.L.T.), University of Massachusetts Lowell; 
and School of Medicine (T.S.), Tufts University, Boston, MA.

Erratum in
    Neurology. 2024 Mar 12;102(5):e209158. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000209158.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2022 Apr 12;98(15):609-610. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200232.
    Neurology. 2023 Jan 17;100(3):163. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000206740.
    Neurology. 2023 Jan 17;100(3):164. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000206741.
    Neurology. 2023 Jan 17;100(3):164-165. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000206742.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The Boston Puerto Rican Health Study (BPRHS) is a 
longitudinal study following self-identified Puerto Rican older adults living in 
the Greater Boston area. Studies have shown higher prevalence of hypertension 
(HTN) and type 2 diabetes (T2D) within this ethnic group compared to age-matched 
non-Hispanic White adults. In this study, we investigated the associations of 
HTN and T2D comorbidity on brain structural integrity and cognitive capacity in 
community-dwelling Puerto Rican adults and compared these measures with older 
adult participants (non-Hispanic White and Hispanic) from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and National Alzheimer's Coordinating 
Center (NACC) databases.
METHODS: BPRHS participants who underwent brain MRI and cognitive testing were 
divided into 4 groups based on their HTN and T2D status: HTN-/T2D-, HTN+/T2D-, 
HTN-/T2D+, and HTN+/T2D+. We assessed microstructural integrity of white matter 
(WM) pathways using diffusion MRI, brain macrostructural integrity using 
hippocampal volumes, and brain age using T1-weighted MRI and cognitive test 
scores. BPRHS results were then compared with results from non-Hispanic White 
and Hispanic participants from the ADNI and NACC databases.
RESULTS: The prevalence of HTN was almost 2 times (66.7% vs 38.7%) and of T2D 
was 5 times (31.8% vs 6.6.%) higher in BPRHS than in ADNI non-Hispanic White 
participants. Diffusion MRI showed clear deterioration patterns in major WM 
tracts in the HTN+/T2D+ group and, to a lesser extent, in the HTN+/T2D- group 
compared to the HTN-/T2D- group. HTN+/T2D+ participants also had the smallest 
hippocampal volume and larger brain aging deviations. Trends toward lower 
executive function and global cognitive scores were observed in HTN+/T2D+ 
relative to HTN-/T2D- individuals. MRI measures and the Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) scores from the HTN+/T2D+ BPRHS group resembled those of ADNI 
White participants with progressive mild cognitive impairment (MCI), while the 
BPRHS HTN-/T2D- participants resembled participants with stable MCI. The BPRHS 
was not significantly different from the ADNI + NACC Hispanic cohort on imaging 
or MMSE measures.
DISCUSSION: The effects of T2D and HTN comorbidity led to greater brain 
structural disruptions than HTN alone. The high prevalence of HTN and T2D in the 
Puerto Rican population may be a key factor contributing to health disparities 
in cognitive impairment in this group compared to non-Hispanic White adults in 
the same age range.
TRIAL REGISTRATION INFORMATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01231958.

© 2022 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200120
PMCID: PMC9012269
PMID: 35354581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Neuroradiology. 2022 Feb;64(2):279-288. doi: 10.1007/s00234-021-02767-y. Epub 
2021 Jul 11.

Right entorhinal cortical thickness is associated with Mini-Mental State 
Examination scores from multi-country datasets using MRI.

Yamashita K(1), Kuwashiro T(2), Ishikawa K(3), Furuya K(4), Harada S(4), Shin 
S(4), Wada N(4), Hirakawa C(5), Okada Y(2), Noguchi T(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Clinical Research Institute, National Hospital 
Organization Kyushu Medical Center, 1-8-1 Jigyohama, Chuo-ku, 810-0065, Fukuoka, 
Japan. yamakou@radiol.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Cerebrovascular Medicine and Neurology, National Hospital 
Organization Kyushu Medical Center, 1-8-1 Jigyohama, Chuo-ku, 810-0065, Fukuoka, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Clinical Research Institute, National Hospital 
Organization Kyushu Medical Center, 1-8-1 Jigyohama, Chuo-ku, 810-0065, Fukuoka, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Radiology, Clinical Research Institute, National Hospital 
Organization Kyushu Medical Center, 1-8-1 Jigyohama, Chuo-ku, 810-0065, Fukuoka, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Medical Technology, Division of Radiology, National Hospital 
Organization Kyushu Medical Center, 1-8-1 Jigyohama, Chuo-ku, Fukuoka, 810-0065, 
Japan.

PURPOSE: To discover common biomarkers correlating with the Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) scores from multi-country MRI datasets.
METHODS: The first dataset comprised 112 subjects (49 men, 63 women; range, 
46-94 years) at the National Hospital Organization Kyushu Medical Center. A 
second dataset comprised 300 subjects from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) database (177 men, 123 women; range, 57-91 years). 
Three-dimensional T1-weighted MR images were collected from both datasets. In 
total, 14 deep gray matter volumes and 70 cortical thicknesses were obtained 
from MR images using FreeSurfer software. Total hippocampal volume and the ratio 
of hippocampus to cerebral volume were also calculated. Correlations between 
each variable and MMSE scores were assessed using Pearson's correlation 
coefficient. Parameters with moderate correlation coefficients (r > 0.3) from 
each dataset were determined as independent variables and evaluated using 
general linear model (GLM) analyses.
RESULTS: In Pearson's correlation coefficient, total and bilateral hippocampal 
volumes, right amygdala volume, and right entorhinal cortex (ERC) thickness 
showed moderate correlation coefficients (r > 0.3) with MMSE scores from the 
first dataset. The ADNI dataset showed moderate correlations with MMSE scores in 
more variables, including bilateral ERC thickness and hippocampal volume. GLM 
analysis revealed that right ERC thickness correlated significantly with MMSE 
score in both datasets. Cortical thicknesses of the left parahippocampal gyrus, 
left inferior parietal lobe, and right fusiform gyrus also significantly 
correlated with MMSE score in the ADNI dataset (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: A positive correlation between right ERC thickness and MMSE score 
was identified from multi-country datasets.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00234-021-02767-y
PMID: 34247261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Neuroimage. 2024 Apr 15;292:120609. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2024.120609. Epub 
2024 Apr 12.

Disentangling sex-dependent effects of APOE on diverse trajectories of cognitive 
decline in Alzheimer's disease.

Ma H(1), Shi Z(2), Kim M(3), Liu B(4), Smith PJ(2), Liu Y(5), Wu G(6); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 
27599, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, 
NC 27412, USA.
(4)Department of Statistics and Data Science, School of Management at Fudan 
University, Shanghai, 200433, PR China.
(5)Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Department of Genetics, Department of 
Biostatistics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. 
Electronic address: yfliu@email.unc.edu.
(6)Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Department of Psychiatry, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Department of Computer Science, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; UNC Neuroscience 
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. Electronic 
address: grwu@med.unc.edu.

Current diagnostic systems for Alzheimer's disease (AD) rely upon clinical signs 
and symptoms, despite the fact that the multiplicity of clinical symptoms 
renders various neuropsychological assessments inadequate to reflect the 
underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. Since putative neuroimaging biomarkers 
play a crucial role in understanding the etiology of AD, we sought to stratify 
the diverse relationships between AD biomarkers and cognitive decline in the 
aging population and uncover risk factors contributing to the diversities in AD. 
To do so, we capitalized on a large amount of neuroimaging data from the ADNI 
study to examine the inflection points along the dynamic relationship between 
cognitive decline trajectories and whole-brain neuroimaging biomarkers, using a 
state-of-the-art statistical model of change point detection. Our findings 
indicated that the temporal relationship between AD biomarkers and cognitive 
decline may differ depending on the synergistic effect of genetic risk and 
biological sex. Specifically, tauopathy-PET biomarkers exhibit a more dynamic 
and age-dependent association with Mini-Mental State Examination scores 
(p<0.05), with inflection points at 72, 78, and 83 years old, compared with 
amyloid-PET and neurodegeneration (cortical thickness from MRI) biomarkers. In 
the landscape of health disparities in AD, our analysis indicated that 
biological sex moderates the rate of cognitive decline associated with APOE4 
genotype. Meanwhile, we found that higher education levels may moderate the 
effect of APOE4, acting as a marker of cognitive reserve.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2024.120609
PMCID: PMC11069285
PMID: 38614371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
have no conflicts of interest to declare.


119. Front Neurol. 2021 Feb 5;11:576029. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2020.576029. eCollection 
2020.

Machine Learning for Diagnosis of AD and Prediction of MCI Progression From 
Brain MRI Using Brain Anatomical Analysis Using Diffeomorphic Deformation.

Syaifullah AH(1)(2), Shiino A(1), Kitahara H(3), Ito R(3), Ishida M(4), Tanigaki 
K(5).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neuroscience Research Center, Shiga University of Medical Science, 
Shiga, Japan.
(2)Center for the Epidemiological Research in Asia (CERA), Shiga University of 
Medical Science, Shiga, Japan.
(3)Department of Radiology, Shiga University of Medical Science, Shiga, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurology, Shimane University, Shimane, Japan.
(5)Research Institute, Shiga Medical Center, Shiga, Japan.

Background: With the growing momentum for the adoption of machine learning (ML) 
in medical field, it is likely that reliance on ML for imaging will become 
routine over the next few years. We have developed a software named BAAD, which 
uses ML algorithms for the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and prediction 
of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) progression. Methods: We constructed an 
algorithm by combining a support vector machine (SVM) to classify and a 
voxel-based morphometry (VBM) to reduce concerned variables. We grouped 
progressive MCI and AD as an AD spectrum and trained SVM according to this 
classification. We randomly selected half from the total 1,314 subjects of AD 
neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) from North America for SVM training, and the 
remaining half were used for validation to fine-tune the model hyperparameters. 
We created two types of SVMs, one based solely on the brain structure (SVMst), 
and the other based on both the brain structure and Mini-Mental State 
Examination score (SVMcog). We compared the model performance with two expert 
neuroradiologists, and further evaluated it in test datasets involving 519, 592, 
69, and 128 subjects from the Australian Imaging, Biomarker & Lifestyle Flagship 
Study of Aging (AIBL), Japanese ADNI, the Minimal Interval Resonance Imaging in 
AD (MIDIAD) and the Open Access Series of Imaging Studies (OASIS), respectively. 
Results: BAAD's SVMs outperformed radiologists for AD diagnosis in a structural 
magnetic resonance imaging review. The accuracy of the two radiologists was 57.5 
and 70.0%, respectively, whereas, that of the SVMst was 90.5%. The diagnostic 
accuracy of the SVMst and SVMcog in the test datasets ranged from 88.0 to 97.1% 
and 92.5 to 100%, respectively. The prediction accuracy for MCI progression was 
83.0% in SVMst and 85.0% in SVMcog. In the AD spectrum classified by SVMst, 
87.1% of the subjects were Aβ positive according to an AV-45 positron emission 
tomography. Similarly, among MCI patients classified for the AD spectrum, 89.5% 
of the subjects progressed to AD. Conclusion: Our ML has shown high performance 
in AD diagnosis and prediction of MCI progression. It outperformed expert 
radiologists, and is expected to provide support in clinical practice.

Copyright © 2021 Syaifullah, Shiino, Kitahara, Ito, Ishida and Tanigaki.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2020.576029
PMCID: PMC7893082
PMID: 33613411

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


120. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;60(2):483-493. doi: 10.3233/JAD-160767.

Risk Factors, Neuroanatomical Correlates, and Outcome of Neuropsychiatric 
Symptoms in Alzheimer's Disease.

Poulin SP(1)(2), Bergeron D(1), Dickerson BC(3)(4)(5)(6)(7); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Clinique Interdisciplinaire de la Mémoire, Centre Hositalier Universitaire de 
Québec, Quebec City, QC, Canada.
(2)Centre de Recherche de l'Institut Universitaire en Santé Mentale de Québec 
(CRISUMQ), QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, 
USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, 
USA.
(5)Department of Frontotemporal Dementia Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Charlestown, MA, USA.
(6)Massachusetts Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA.
(7)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND: An integrative model of neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS) in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is lacking.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we investigated the risk factors, anatomy, biology, 
and outcomes of NPS in AD.
METHODS: 181 subjects were included from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Study (ADNI). NPS were assessed with the Neuropsychiatric Inventory 
Questionnaire at baseline and 6 months. NPI >3 was used as a threshold for NPS 
positivity. Three NPS courses were characterized: 1) minimal/absent (negative at 
0 and 6 months, n = 77); 2) fluctuating (positive only at one time point, 
n = 53); 3) persistent (positive at both time points, n = 51). We examined the 
association between NPS course and family history of dementia, personal history 
of psychiatric disorders, cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers, atrophy patterns, as 
well as longitudinal cognitive and functional measures at 12 and 24 months 
(MMSE, CDR-SOB, FAQ).
RESULTS: AD subjects with absent, fluctuating, or persistent NPS had similar CSF 
amyloid-β and tau levels. AD subjects with minimal/absent NPS had less personal 
history of psychiatric disorders (35%) than those with fluctuating (57%; 
p = 0.015) or persistent NPS (47%, not significant). At 24 months, AD subjects 
with persistent NPS had worse cognitive (MMSE; p = 0.05) and functional 
(CDR-SOB; p = 0.016) outcomes. Dorsolateral prefrontal atrophy was seen in 
persistent NPS, but not in fluctuating NPS.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that individuals with personal history of 
psychiatric disorders might be more vulnerable to develop NPS throughout the 
course of AD. The worst cognitive and functional outcomes associated with NPS in 
AD underscores the importance of monitoring NPS early in the disease course.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-160767
PMCID: PMC5963953
PMID: 28869463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2015 Jul;21(6):455-67. doi: 10.1017/S1355617715000430.

Associations between Verbal Learning Slope and Neuroimaging Markers across the 
Cognitive Aging Spectrum.

Gifford KA(1), Phillips JS(1), Samuels LR(1), Lane EM(1), Bell SP(1), Liu D(1), 
Hohman TJ(1), Romano RR 3rd(1), Fritzsche LR(1), Lu Z(2), Jefferson AL(1); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Shaw 
LM, Khachaturian Z, Sorensen G, Carrillo M, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies 
P, Fillit H, Hefti F, Holtzman D, Mesulam M, Potter W, Snyder P, Schwartz A, 
Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, 
Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, Balasubramanian AB, Mason J, Sim I, Beckett L, 
Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, 
DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Vemuri P, Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward 
C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Morris 
JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Taylor-Reinwald L, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, 
Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin 
S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Thal L, Khachaturian Z, Thal L, 
Buckholtz N, Weiner MW, Snyder PJ, Potter W, Paul S, Albert M, Frank R, 
Khachaturian Z, Hsiao J, Kaye J, Quinn J, Silbert L, Lind B, Carter R, Dolen S, 
Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Teodoro L, Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag 
H, Fleisher A, Heidebrink JL, Lord JL, Petersen R, Mason SS, Albers CS, Knopman 
D, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Chowdhury M, Rountree S, Dang M, 
Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Ances B, Morris JC, Carroll M, Creech ML, Franklin 
E, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Oliver A, Marson D, Griffith R, Clark D, Geldmacher 
D, Brockington J, Roberson E, Love MN, Grossman H, Mitsis E, Shah RC, 
deToledo-Morrell L, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Roberts P, Albert M, Onyike C, 
D'Agostino D 2nd, Kielb S, Galvin JE, Cerbone B, Michel CA, Pogorelec DM, 
Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, Glodzik L, De Santi S, Doraiswamy P, Petrella JR, Borges 
S, Wong TZ, Coleman E, Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk D, Clark CM, Smith CD, 
Jicha G, Hardy P, Sinha P, Oates E, Conrad G, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, 
Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein BS, Martin K, Makino KM, Ismail M, Brand C, Mulnard 
RA, Thai G, Mc-Adams-Ortiz C, Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, 
Cellar JS, Burns JM, Swerdlow RH, Brooks WM, Apostolova L, Tingus K, Woo E, 
Silverman DH, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Kendall T, 
Johnson H, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews BR, Brosch JR, Herring S, Hunt C, van 
Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Varma P, Chertkow H, Bergman H, Hosein C, Black 
S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GY, Feldman H, Mudge B, Assaly M, Finger E, 
Pasternack S, Rachisky I, Trost D, Kertesz A, Bernick C, Munic D, Mesulam MM, 
Lipowski K, Weintraub S, Bonakdarpour B, Kerwin D, Wu CK, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, 
Villena T, Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall 
G, Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh MN, Belden CM, 
Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, 
Obisesan TO, Wolday S, Allard J, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Tatsuoka C, Fatica P, 
Fletcher E, Maillard P, Olichney J, DeCarli C, Carmichael O, Kittur S, Borrie M, 
Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen 
D, Tariot P, Burke A, Trncic N, Fleisher A, Reeder S, Bates V, Capote H, Rainka 
M, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Adeli A, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, Brown AD, Pearlson 
GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Flashman LA, Seltzer M, Hynes ML, Santulli RB, Sink KM, 
Gordineer L, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Querfurth H, Tremont G, 
Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Perry D, Mintzer J, Spicer 
K, Bachman D, Finger E, Pasternak S, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, Drost D, 
Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, Schultz SK, Ponto LL, Shim H, Smith KE, Relkin 
N, Chaing G, Lin M, Ravdin L, Smith A, Raj BA, Fargher K, Weiner MW, Aisen P, 
Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Green RC, Harvey D, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Morris 
JC, Saykin AJ, Shaw LM, Toga AW, Trojanowki JQ, Neylan T, Grafman J, Green RC, 
Montine T, Weiner M, Petersen R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Gessert D, 
Sather T, Davis M, Morrison R, Jiminez G, Neylan T, Hayes J, Finley S, Harvey D, 
Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Kantarci K, 
Ward C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Landau S, Morris JC, 
Cairns NJ, Householder E, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, Figurski M, 
Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim 
S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Friedl K, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Brewer J, 
Vanderswag H, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Fleischman D, Arfanakis K, Shah RC, 
Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Doraiswamy P, Petrella JR, James O, Porsteinsson AP, 
Goldstein B, Martin KS, Mulnard RA, Thai G, McAdams-Ortiz C, Mintzer J, 
Massoglia D, Brawman-Mintzer O, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Jagust W, 
Landau S, Rosen H, Perry D, Turner RS, Behan K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson 
KA, Marshall G, Sabbagh MN, Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Obisesan TO, Wolday S, 
Allard J, Johnson SC, Fruehling J, Harding S, Peskind ER, Petrie EC, Li G, 
Yesavage JA, Taylor JL, Furst AJ, Chao S, Relkin N, Chaing G, Ravdin L.

Author information:
(1)1Vanderbilt Memory & Alzheimer's Center,Department of Neurology,Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center,Nashville,Tennessee.
(2)2Department of Biostatistics,Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center,Nashville,Tennessee.

A symptom of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a 
flat learning profile. Learning slope calculation methods vary, and the optimal 
method for capturing neuroanatomical changes associated with MCI and early AD 
pathology is unclear. This study cross-sectionally compared four different 
learning slope measures from the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (simple 
slope, regression-based slope, two-slope method, peak slope) to structural 
neuroimaging markers of early AD neurodegeneration (hippocampal volume, cortical 
thickness in parahippocampal gyrus, precuneus, and lateral prefrontal cortex) 
across the cognitive aging spectrum [normal control (NC); (n=198; age=76±5), MCI 
(n=370; age=75±7), and AD (n=171; age=76±7)] in ADNI. Within diagnostic group, 
general linear models related slope methods individually to neuroimaging 
variables, adjusting for age, sex, education, and APOE4 status. Among MCI, 
better learning performance on simple slope, regression-based slope, and late 
slope (Trial 2-5) from the two-slope method related to larger parahippocampal 
thickness (all p-values<.01) and hippocampal volume (p<.01). Better 
regression-based slope (p<.01) and late slope (p<.01) were related to larger 
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex in MCI. No significant associations emerged 
between any slope and neuroimaging variables for NC (p-values ≥.05) or AD 
(p-values ≥.02). Better learning performances related to larger medial temporal 
lobe (i.e., hippocampal volume, parahippocampal gyrus thickness) and 
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex in MCI only. Regression-based and late slope 
were most highly correlated with neuroimaging markers and explained more 
variance above and beyond other common memory indices, such as total learning. 
Simple slope may offer an acceptable alternative given its ease of calculation.

DOI: 10.1017/S1355617715000430
PMCID: PMC4657447
PMID: 26219209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2021 Jan 4;13(1):2. doi: 10.1186/s13195-020-00713-3.

Four subgroups based on tau levels in Alzheimer's disease observed in two 
independent cohorts.

Duits FH(1), Wesenhagen KEJ(2), Ekblad L(1)(3), Wolters E(1)(4), Willemse 
EAJ(5); ADNI; Scheltens P(1), van der Flier WM(1)(6), Teunissen CE(5), Visser 
PJ(1)(7)(8), Tijms BM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology, Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. 
k.wesenhagen@amsterdamumc.nl.
(3)Turku PET Centre, University of Turku and Turku University Hospital, Turku, 
Finland.
(4)Department of Radiology & Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam 
UMC, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Neurochemistry Laboratory, Amsterdam UMC, 
Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(6)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(7)Alzheimer Center Limburg, Department of Psychiatry & Neuropsychology, School 
of Mental Health and Neuroscience, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands.
(8)Division of Neurogeriatrics, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and 
Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: As Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology presents decades before 
dementia manifests, unbiased biomarker cut-points may more closely reflect 
presence of pathology than clinically defined cut-points. Currently, unbiased 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tau cut-points are lacking.
METHODS: We investigated CSF t-tau and p-tau cut-points across the clinical 
spectrum using Gaussian mixture modelling, in two independent cohorts (Amsterdam 
Dementia Cohort and ADNI).
RESULTS: Individuals with normal cognition (NC) (total n = 1111), mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) (total n = 1213) and Alzheimer's disease dementia (AD) (total 
n = 1524) were included. In both cohorts, four CSF t- and p-tau distributions 
and three corresponding cut-points were identified. Increasingly high tau 
subgroups were characterized by steeper MMSE decline and higher progression risk 
to AD (cohort/platform-dependent HR, t-tau 1.9-21.3; p-tau 2.2-9.5).
LIMITATIONS: The number of subjects in some subgroups and subanalyses was small, 
especially in the highest tau subgroup and in tau PET analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: In two independent cohorts, t-tau and p-tau levels showed four 
subgroups. Increasingly high tau subgroups were associated with faster clinical 
decline, suggesting our approach may aid in more precise prognoses.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-020-00713-3
PMCID: PMC7780683
PMID: 33397464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Prof. dr. Scheltens has acquired grants for the 
institution from GE Healthcare and Piramal and received consultancy/speaker fees 
paid to the institution from Novartis, Probiodrug, Biogen, Roche, and EIP 
Pharma, LLC in the past 2 years. Research programmes of Prof. dr. Wiesje van der 
Flier received funding by ZonMW, NWO, EU-JPND, Alzheimer Nederland, 
CardioVascular Onderzoek Nederland, Health~Holland, Topsector Life Sciences & 
Health, stichting Dioraphte, Gieskes-Strijbis fonds, stichting Equilibrio, 
Biogen MA Inc., Life-MI, AVID, Combinostics. WF holds the Pasman chair. WF has 
performed contract research for Biogen MA Inc. All funding is paid to her 
institution. Prof. dr. Teunissen received grants from the European Commission, 
the Dutch Research Council (ZonMW), Association of Frontotemporal 
Dementia/Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation, The Weston Brain Institute, 
Alzheimer Netherlands. Prof. Dr. Teunissen has functioned in advisory boards of 
Roche, received non-financial support in the form of research consumables from 
ADxNeurosciences and Euroimmun, performed contract research or received grants 
from Probiodrug, Biogen, Esai, Toyama, Janssen Prevention Center, Boehringer, 
AxonNeurosciences, EIP farma, PeopleBio, Roche. The other authors reported no 
conflicts of interest.


123. Med Image Comput Comput Assist Interv. 2014;17(Pt 2):162-9. doi: 
10.1007/978-3-319-10470-6_21.

Multi-modality canonical feature selection for Alzheimer's disease diagnosis.

Zhu X, Suk HI, Shen D.

Feature selection has been commonly regarded as an effective method to lessen 
the problem of high dimension and low sample size in medical image analysis. In 
this paper, we propose a novel multimodality canonical feature selection method. 
Unlike the conventional sparse Multi-Task Learning (MTL) based feature selection 
method that mostly considered only the relationship between target response 
variables, we further consider the correlations between features of different 
modalities by projecting them into a canonical space determined by canonical 
correlation analysis. We call the projections as canonical representations. By 
setting the canonical representations as regressors in a sparse least square 
regression framework and by further penalizing the objective function with a new 
canonical regularizer on the weight coefficient matrix, we formulate a 
multi-modality canonical feature selection method. With the help of the 
canonical information of canonical representations and also a canonical 
regularizer, the proposed method selects canonical-cross-modality features that 
are useful for the tasks of clinical scores regression and multi-class disease 
identification. In our experiments on the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) dataset, we combine Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and 
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) images to jointly predict clinical scores of 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog) and 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and also identify multiclass disease status 
for Alzheimer's disease diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-10470-6_21
PMCID: PMC4465097
PMID: 25485375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Brain Commun. 2021 Jun 26;3(3):fcab140. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab140. 
eCollection 2021 Jul.

Machine learning identifies novel markers predicting functional decline in older 
adults.

Valerio KE(1), Prieto S(1), Hasselbach AN(1), Moody JN(1), Hayes SM(1)(2), Hayes 
JP(1)(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Chronic Brain Injury Initiative, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.

The ability to carry out instrumental activities of daily living, such as paying 
bills, remembering appointments and shopping alone decreases with age, yet there 
are remarkable individual differences in the rate of decline among older adults. 
Understanding variables associated with a decline in instrumental activities of 
daily living is critical to providing appropriate intervention to prolong 
independence. Prior research suggests that cognitive measures, neuroimaging and 
fluid-based biomarkers predict functional decline. However, a priori selection 
of variables can lead to the over-valuation of certain variables and exclusion 
of others that may be predictive. In this study, we used machine learning 
techniques to select a wide range of baseline variables that best predicted 
functional decline in two years in individuals from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative dataset. The sample included 398 individuals 
characterized as cognitively normal or mild cognitive impairment. Support vector 
machine classification algorithms were used to identify the most predictive 
modality from five different data modality types (demographics, structural MRI, 
fluorodeoxyglucose-PET, neurocognitive and genetic/fluid-based biomarkers). In 
addition, variable selection identified individual variables across all 
modalities that best predicted functional decline in a testing sample. Of the 
five modalities examined, neurocognitive measures demonstrated the best accuracy 
in predicting functional decline (accuracy = 74.2%; area under the curve = 
0.77), followed by fluorodeoxyglucose-PET (accuracy = 70.8%; area under the 
curve = 0.66). The individual variables with the greatest discriminatory ability 
for predicting functional decline included partner report of language in the 
Everyday Cognition questionnaire, the ADAS13, and activity of the left angular 
gyrus using fluorodeoxyglucose-PET. These three variables collectively explained 
32% of the total variance in functional decline. Taken together, the machine 
learning model identified novel biomarkers that may be involved in the 
processing, retrieval, and conceptual integration of semantic information and 
which predict functional decline two years after assessment. These findings may 
be used to explore the clinical utility of the Everyday Cognition as a 
non-invasive, cost and time effective tool to predict future functional decline.

© The Author(s) (2021). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab140
PMCID: PMC8286801
PMID: 34286271


125. Neuroimage. 2018 Nov 1;181:521-538. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.07.032. Epub 
2018 Jul 23.

Reconstructing subject-specific effect maps.

Konukoglu E(1), Glocker B(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
ender.konukoglu@vision.ee.ethz.ch.
(2)Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: b.glocker@imperial.ac.uk.

Predictive models allow subject-specific inference when analyzing disease 
related alterations in neuroimaging data. Given a subject's data, inference can 
be made at two levels: global, i.e. identifiying condition presence for the 
subject, and local, i.e. detecting condition effect on each individual 
measurement extracted from the subject's data. While global inference is widely 
used, local inference, which can be used to form subject-specific effect maps, 
is rarely used because existing models often yield noisy detections composed of 
dispersed isolated islands. In this article, we propose a reconstruction method, 
named RSM, to improve subject-specific detections of predictive modeling 
approaches and in particular, binary classifiers. RSM specifically aims to 
reduce noise due to sampling error associated with using a finite sample of 
examples to train classifiers. The proposed method is a wrapper-type algorithm 
that can be used with different binary classifiers in a diagnostic manner, i.e. 
without information on condition presence. Reconstruction is posed as a 
Maximum-A-Posteriori problem with a prior model whose parameters are estimated 
from training data in a classifier-specific fashion. Experimental evaluation is 
performed on synthetically generated data and data from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. Results on synthetic data demonstrate 
that using RSM yields higher detection accuracy compared to using models 
directly or with bootstrap averaging. Analyses on the ADNI dataset show that RSM 
can also improve correlation between subject-specific detections in cortical 
thickness data and non-imaging markers of Alzheimer's Disease (AD), such as the 
Mini Mental State Examination Score and Cerebrospinal Fluid amyloid-β levels. 
Further reliability studies on the longitudinal ADNI dataset show improvement on 
detection reliability when RSM is used.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.07.032
PMID: 30048747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Alzheimers Dement. 2020 Sep;16(9):1234-1247. doi: 10.1002/alz.12110. Epub 2020 
Jul 27.

Circulating ethanolamine plasmalogen indices in Alzheimer's disease: Relation to 
diagnosis, cognition, and CSF tau.

Kling MA(1)(2), Goodenowe DB(3), Senanayake V(3), MahmoudianDehkordi S(4), 
Arnold M(4)(5), Massaro TJ(6), Baillie R(7), Han X(8), Leung YY(9), Saykin 
AJ(10), Nho K(10), Kueider-Paisley A(4), Tenenbaum JD(11), Wang LS(9), Shaw 
LM(9), Trojanowski JQ(9), Kaddurah-Daouk RF(4)(12)(13); Alzheimer's Disease 
Metabolomics Consortium (ADMC) and the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI)(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Behavioral Health Service, Crescenz VA Medical Center, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Prodrome Sciences Inc., Temecula, California, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University, Durham, 
North Carolina, USA.
(5)Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 
German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany.
(6)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, 
USA.
(7)Rosa & Co LLC, San Carlos, California, USA.
(8)University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, 
USA.
(9)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(10)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences and the Indiana Alzheimer 
Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, 
USA.
(11)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, 
North Carolina, USA.
(12)Duke Institute of Brain Sciences, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, 
USA.
(13)Department of Medicine, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Altered lipid metabolism is implicated in Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), but the mechanisms remain obscure. Aging-related declines in circulating 
plasmalogens containing omega-3 fatty acids may increase AD risk by reducing 
plasmalogen availability.
METHODS: We measured four ethanolamine plasmalogens (PlsEtns) and four closely 
related phosphatidylethanolamines (PtdEtns) from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI; n = 1547 serum) and University of Pennsylvania 
(UPenn; n = 112 plasma) cohorts, and derived indices reflecting PlsEtn and 
PtdEtn metabolism: PL-PX (PlsEtns), PL/PE (PlsEtn/PtdEtn ratios), and PBV 
(plasmalogen biosynthesis value; a composite index). We tested associations with 
baseline diagnosis, cognition, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) AD biomarkers.
RESULTS: Results revealed statistically significant negative relationships in 
ADNI between AD versus CN with PL-PX (P = 0.007) and PBV (P = 0.005), late mild 
cognitive impairment (LMCI) versus cognitively normal (CN) with PL-PX (P = 2.89 
× 10-5 ) and PBV (P = 1.99 × 10-4 ), and AD versus LMCI with PL/PE (P = 1.85 × 
10-4 ). In the UPenn cohort, AD versus CN diagnosis associated negatively with 
PL/PE (P = 0.0191) and PBV (P = 0.0296). In ADNI, cognition was negatively 
associated with plasmalogen indices, including Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale 13-item cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog13; PL-PX: P = 3.24 × 10-6 ; PBV: P = 
6.92 × 10-5 ) and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE; PL-PX: P = 1.28 × 10-9 ; 
PBV: P = 6.50 × 10-9 ). In the UPenn cohort, there was a trend toward a similar 
relationship of MMSE with PL/PE (P = 0.0949). In ADNI, CSF total-tau was 
negatively associated with PL-PX (P = 5.55 × 10-6 ) and PBV (P = 7.77 × 10-6 ). 
Additionally, CSF t-tau/Aβ1-42 ratio was negatively associated with these same 
indices (PL-PX, P = 2.73 × 10-6 ; PBV, P = 4.39 × 10-6 ). In the UPenn cohort, 
PL/PE was negatively associated with CSF total-tau (P = 0.031) and t-tau/Aβ1-42 
(P = 0.021). CSF Aβ1-42 was not significantly associated with any of these 
indices in either cohort.
DISCUSSION: These data extend previous studies by showing an association of 
decreased plasmalogen indices with AD, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 
cognition, and CSF tau. Future studies are needed to better define mechanistic 
relationships, and to test the effects of interventions designed to replete 
serum plasmalogens.

© 2020 the Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.12110
PMCID: PMC8152932
PMID: 32715599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Integr Neurosci. 2023 Jul 20;22(4):99. doi: 10.31083/j.jin2204099.

The Structural Changes of Frontal Subregions and Their Correlations with 
Cognitive Impairment in Patients with Alzheimer's Disease.

Shi C(1), Deng H(1), Deng X(1), Rao D(1), Yue W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan Medical 
College, 637000 Nanchong, Sichuan, China.

BACKGROUND: The frontal lobe is affected by Alzheimer's disease (AD) and mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI). However, we still lack sufficient understanding of 
subregion atrophy in the frontal cortex, and the relationship between subregions 
volume and cognitive decline in AD or MCI remains unclear.
METHODS: This study enrolled 434 participants from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), including 150 cognitively normals (CN), 187 
subjects with MCI, and 97 patients with AD. The gray matter of frontal regions 
and subregions was divided based on the BNA-246 atlas and its volume was 
measured by voxel-based morphometry (VBM). Analysis of covariance was performed 
to compare the differences in frontal regions and subregions volume. Then, 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and the area under the curve (AUC) 
were used to analyze the discriminative ability of subregion volume to 
distinguish the three groups. In addition, we investigated the association of 
subregion volume with Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score and Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Behavior section (ADAS-cog) scores with age, 
gender, education, and the estimated total intracranial volume (eTIV) as 
covariates.
RESULTS: In addition to the regions of frontal lobe atrophy found in previous 
studies, atrophy of the precentral gyrus (PrG) and some of its subregions were 
found in MCI. The volume of the right dorsal area 9/46 (MFG_7_1) was the best 
index to differentiate AD from CN, with an AUC value of 0.7. Moreover, we found 
that some subregions are associated with cognition in patients with MCI and AD.
CONCLUSIONS: Frontal lobe atrophy in MCI is more extensive than we assumed. In 
addition, the volume of right MFG_7_1 has the potential to distinguish AD from 
CN.

© 2023 The Author(s). Published by IMR Press.

DOI: 10.31083/j.jin2204099
PMID: 37519164

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


128. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;73(2):759-768. doi: 10.3233/JAD-191005.

Associations of White Matter Hyperintensities with Cognitive Decline: A 
Longitudinal Study.

Wang YL(1), Chen W(1), Cai WJ(2), Hu H(1), Xu W(1), Wang ZT(1), Cao XP(3), Tan 
L(1), Yu JT(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(2)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Clinical Research Center, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.

White matter hyperintensities (WMHs), mainly caused by cerebrovascular injury, 
may lead to cognitive impairment. In order to identify whether the volume of 
WMHs is associated with cognitive decline over years, this longitudinal study 
involved 818 individuals from the ADNI-2 dataset from August 2010 to May 2017. 
Cross-sectional and longitudinal associations of WMHs with 8 cognitive domains 
were explored, using Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA), Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDRSB), Alzheimer 
Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive (ADAS-Cog13), Rey Auditory Verbal Learning 
Test (RAVLT), Functional Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ), executive function 
(ADNI-EF), and memory function (ADNI-Mem). The association analyses were 
performed using multiple linear regression models, linear mixed models, Spearman 
rank correlation, and Kaplan-Meier survival curves. The volumes of WMHs were 
greater in patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia compared with 
controls (p < 0.001) and mild cognitive impairment (p = 0.006) patients at 
baseline. The bigger volumes of WMHs correlated with worse performances on 
ADAS-Cog13 and ADNI-EF (p = 0.029; p = 0.003) at baseline and MMSE, MoCA, CDRSB, 
ADAS-Cog13, FAQ, and ADNI-Mem (overall p < 0.05) longitudinally, after adjusting 
for age, sex, educational level, apolipoprotein E ɛ4 genotype, hypertension, 
hyperlipidemia, diabetes, smoking, infarction, and diagnosis. Additionally, the 
correlations between the change rate of WMHs and change rates of MMSE, MoCA, 
CDRSB, FAQ, ADNI-EF, and ADNI-Mem were statistically significant. Furthermore, 
patients with high WMH volumes showed an increased likelihood of dementia. The 
results of the study suggest that WMH volume is associated with cognitive 
decline, and it contributes to the conversion to AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-191005
PMID: 31839612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;74(1):55-63. doi: 10.3233/JAD-190822.

Machine Learning Predictive Models Can Improve Efficacy of Clinical Trials for 
Alzheimer's Disease.

Ezzati A(1), Lipton RB(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Montefiore 
Medical Center, Bronx, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: The ideal participants for Alzheimer's disease (AD) clinical trials 
would show cognitive decline in the absence of treatment (i.e., placebo arm) and 
also would be responsive to the therapeutic intervention being studied (i.e., 
drug arm). One strategy to boost the power of trials is to enroll individuals 
who are more likely to progress targeted using data-driven predictive models.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate if machine learning (ML) models can effectively 
predict clinical disease progression (cognitive decline) in mild-to-moderate AD 
patients during the timeframe of a phase III clinical trial.
METHODS: Data from 202 participants with a diagnosis of AD at baseline from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) was used to train ML 
classifiers that can differentiate between individuals who had declining 
cognitive function (DC) and individuals with stable cognitive function (SC). DC 
was defined as any downward change in the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale 
cognitive subscale (ADAS-cog) score over 12 months of follow-up. SC was defined 
by the absence of decline in ADAS-cog. Trained models were applied to data from 
77 participants from the placebo arm of the phase III trial of Semagacestat 
(LFAN study) to identify subgroups of SC versus DC.
RESULTS: Only 74.8% of ADNI participants and 63.6% of LFAN participants had 
cognitive decline after one year of follow up. K-nearest neighbors (kNN) 
classifier had an accuracy of 68.3%, sensitivity of 80.1%, and specificity of 
33.3% for identifying decliners in ADNI (training sample). In LFAN (validation 
sample), the model showed an overall accuracy of 61.3%, sensitivity of 65.5%, 
and specificity of 47.0% in identifying decliners at the 12 months of follow-up. 
The model had a positive predictive value of 80.8%, which was 17.2% more than 
the base prevalence of decliners.
CONCLUSIONS: Machine learning predictive models can be effectively used to boost 
the power of clinical trials by reducing the sample size.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-190822
PMCID: PMC7201366
PMID: 31985462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2021 Dec 31;7(1):e12168. doi: 10.1002/trc2.12168. 
eCollection 2021.

Prescribing cholinesterase inhibitors in mild cognitive impairment-Observations 
from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Stage E(1)(2), Svaldi D(2), Sokolow S(3)(4)(5), Risacher SL(1)(6), Marosi K(3), 
Rotter JI(7)(8)(9), Saykin AJ(1)(6), Apostolova LG(1)(2)(6)(10); Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Indiana Alzheimer Disease Center Indianapolis IN USA.
(2)Department of Neurology IU School of Medicine Indianapolis IN USA.
(3)UCLA School of Nursing Los Angeles CA USA.
(4)UCLA Brain Research Insitute Los Angeles CA USA.
(5)UCLA Clinical and Translational Science Institute Los Angeles CA USA.
(6)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences IU School of Medicine 
Indianapolis IN USA.
(7)The Institute for Translational Genomics and Population Sciences Harbor-UCLA 
Medical Center Torrance CA USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics Harbor-UCLA Medical Center Torrance CA USA.
(9)The Lundquist Institute for Biomedical Innovation Harbor-UCLA Medical Center 
Torrance CA USA.
(10)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics IU School of Medicine 
Indianapolis IN USA.

INTRODUCTION: Analyses of off-label use of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors 
(AChEIs) in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) has produced mixed results. Post hoc 
analyses of observational cohorts, such as the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI), have reported deleterious effects in AChEI-treated subjects 
(AChEI+). Here, we used neuroimaging biomarkers to determine whether AChEI+ 
subjects had a greater rate of neurodegeneration than untreated (AChEI-) 
subjects while accounting for baseline differences.
METHODS: We selected 121 ADNI MCI AChEI+ subjects and 151 AChEI- subjects with a 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan; 82 AChEI+ and 110 AChEI- also had a 
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) scan. A subset (83 AChEI+ and 98 AChEI-) had 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or amyloid positron emission tomography (PET) 
assessment for amyloid positivity. Linear regression models were used to compare 
the effect of treatment on changes in Mini-Mental State Examination and Clinical 
Dementia Rating-Sum of Boxes scores. We used standard regression in SPM (for 
baseline) and the SPM toolbox sandwich estimator, SwE (for longitudinal) for 
comparisons of AChEI+ and AChEI- FDG PET and MRI data.
RESULTS: At baseline, the AChEI+ group had significantly reduced cortical gray 
matter density (GMD) and more hypometabolism than AChEI- subjects. The greater 
rate of atrophy and hypometabolic changes over time in AChEI+ compared to AChEI- 
subjects did not survive correction for baseline differences. AChEI+ 
participants were more likely to be amyloid-positive and have lower GMD and FDG 
standardized uptake value ratio than AChEI- at baseline. AChEI+ subjects showed 
greater atrophy over time, which remained significant after controlling for 
amyloid status.
DISCUSSION: Our data suggest that the observed differences in rates of cognitive 
decline, atrophy, and hypometabolism are likely the result of significant 
baseline differences between the groups. Furthermore, the data indicate no 
treatment effect of AChEI (positive of negative), rather that physicians 
prescribe AChEI to subjects who present with more severe clinical impairment. 
This alone may account for the negative effect seen previously in the ADNI 
population of AChEI use among MCI subjects.

© 2021 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical 
Interventions published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of Alzheimer's 
Association.

DOI: 10.1002/trc2.12168
PMCID: PMC8719350
PMID: 35005201

Conflict of interest statement: Eddie Stage, Diana Svaldi, Sophie Sokolow, 
Shannon L. Risacher, Krisztina Marosi, and Jerome I. Rotter have nothing to 
disclose. Andrew J. Saykin has received research support from Eli Lilly and PET 
tracer precursor from AVID Radiopharmaceuticals. He also served on an advisory 
board for Bayer Oncology and received support from Springer‐Nature as 
Editor‐in‐Chief of Brain Imaging and Behavior. Liana G. Apostolova has served on 
an advisory board for Eli Lilly and Biogen and on the Speakers Bureau for 
Piramal and Eli Lilly. Dr. Apostolova has received research support from GE 
Healthcare; AVID Radiopharmaceuticals, Inc.; and Piramal Imaging. Liana G. 
Apostolova, MD, MS, has served on Advisory Boards for Eli Lilly, Biogen and Two 
Labs. Dr. Apostolova has received research support from GE Healthcare, AVID 
Radiopharmaceuticals, Inc., Life Molecular Imaging and Roche Diagnostics. Dr. 
Apostolova serves on a DSMB for IQVIA.


131. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;61(1):79-89. doi: 10.3233/JAD-170498.

Cognitive Variability Predicts Incident Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive 
Impairment Comparable to a Cerebrospinal Fluid Biomarker.

Gleason CE(1)(2)(3), Norton D(3)(4), Anderson ED(5), Wahoske M(1)(3), Washington 
DT(1)(2)(3), Umucu E(6), Koscik RL(7), Dowling NM(8), Johnson SC(1)(2)(3)(8), 
Carlsson CM(1)(2)(3)(8), Asthana S(1)(2)(3)(8); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatrics and Gerontology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center (11G), William S. Middleton 
Memorial Veterans Hospital, Madison, WI, USA.
(3)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Madison, WI, USA.
(4)University of Wisconsin, Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, 
Madison, WI, USA.
(5)Wright State University, School of Education and Human Services, Dayton, OH, 
USA.
(6)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Texas at El Paso, El 
Paso, TX, USA.
(7)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Institute, Department of Medicine, University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(8)George Washington University, School of Nursing, Washington, DC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) biomarkers are emerging as critically 
important for disease detection and monitoring. Most biomarkers are obtained 
through invasive, resource-intense procedures. A cognitive marker, 
intra-individual cognitive variability (IICV) may provide an alternative or 
adjunct marker of disease risk for individuals unable or disinclined to undergo 
lumbar puncture.
OBJECTIVE: To contrast risk of incident AD and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
associated with IICV to risk associated with well-established biomarkers: 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) phosphorylated tau protein (p-tau181) and amyloid-β 42 
(Aβ42) peptide.
METHODS: Dispersion in cognitive performance, IICV, was estimated with a 
published algorithm, and included Trail Making Test A and B, Rey Auditory Verbal 
Learning Test (RAVLT), and the American National Adult Reading Test (ANART). CSF 
biomarkers were expressed as a ratio: p-tau181/Aβ42, wherein high values 
signified pathognomonic profiles. Logistic regression models included 
longitudinal data from 349 Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
participants who completed lumbar puncture. All subjects were cognitively 
healthy (n = 105) or diagnosed with MCI (n = 244) at baseline. We examined odds 
of conversion associated with baseline elevations in IICV and/or ratio of CSF 
p-tau181/Aβ42.
RESULTS: When included in models alone or in combination with CSF p-tau181/Aβ42, 
one standard IICV unit higher was associated with an estimated odds ratio for 
incident AD or MCI of 2.81 (95% CI: 1.83-4.33) in the most inclusive sample, and 
an odds ratio of 3.41 (95% CI: 2.03-5.73) when restricted to participants with 
MCI. Iterative analyses suggested that IICV independently improved model fit 
even when individual index components were included in comparative models.
CONCLUSIONS: These analyses provide preliminary support for IICV as a marker of 
incident AD and MCI. This easily-disseminated, non-invasive marker compared 
favorably to well-established CSF biomarkers.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-170498
PMCID: PMC5714663
PMID: 29125485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest/Disclosure Statement The 
authors have no conflict of interest to report.


132. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2014;2014:934-7. doi: 
10.1109/EMBC.2014.6943745.

Distance-informed metric learning for Alzheimer's disease staging.

Shi B, Wang Z, Liu J.

Identifying intermediate biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is of great 
importance for diagnosis and prognosis of the disease. In this study, we develop 
a new AD staging method to classify patients into Normal Controls (NC), Mild 
Cognitive Impairment (MCI), and AD groups. Our solution employs a novel metric 
learning technique that improves classification rates through the guidance of 
some weak supervisory information in AD progression. More specifically, those 
information are in the form of pairwise constraints that specify the relative 
Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) score disparity of two subjects, depending 
on whether they are in the same group or not. With the imposed constraints, the 
common knowledge that MCI generally sits in between of NC and AD can be 
integrated into the classification distance metric. Subjects from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative cohort (ADNI; 56 AD, 104 MCI, 161 
controls) were used to demonstrate the improvements made comparing with two 
state-of-the-art metric learning solutions: large margin nearest neighbors 
(LMNN) and relevant component analysis (RCA).

DOI: 10.1109/EMBC.2014.6943745
PMID: 25570113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Brain. 2024 Dec 18;17(1):93. doi: 10.1186/s13041-024-01169-4.

Serotonin enhances neurogenesis biomarkers, hippocampal volumes, and cognitive 
functions in Alzheimer's disease.

Azargoonjahromi A(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. aazargoonj@gmail.com.

Research on serotonin reveals a lack of consensus regarding its role in brain 
volume, especially concerning biomarkers linked to neurogenesis and 
neuroplasticity, such as ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF), fibroblast growth 
factor 4 (FGF-4), bone morphogenetic protein 6 (BMP-6), and matrix 
metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) in Alzheimer's disease (AD). This study aimed to 
investigate the influence of serotonin on brain structure and hippocampal 
volumes in relation to cognitive functions in AD, as well as its link with 
biomarkers like CNTF, FGF-4, BMP-6, and MMP-1. Data from 133 ADNI participants 
with AD included cognitive assessments (CDR-SB), serotonin measurements 
(Biocrates AbsoluteIDQ p180 kit, UPLC-MS/MS), and neurotrophic factors 
quantified via multiplex proteomics. Gray matter volume changes were analyzed 
using Voxel-Based Morphometry (VBM) with MRI. Statistical analyses employed 
Pearson correlation, bootstrap methods, and FDR-adjusted p-values (< 0.05 
or < 0.01) via the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure, alongside nonparametric 
methods. The analysis found a positive correlation between serotonin levels and 
total brain (r = 0.229, p = 0.023) and hippocampal volumes (right: r = 0.186, 
p = 0.032; left: r = 0.210, p = 0.023), even after FDR adjustment. Higher 
serotonin levels were linked to better cognitive function (negative correlation 
with CDR-SB, r = -0.230, p = 0.024). Notably, serotonin levels were positively 
correlated with BMP-6 (r = 0.173, p = 0.047), CNTF (r = 0.216, p = 0.013), FGF-4 
(r = 0.176, p = 0.043), and MMP-1 (r = 0.202, p = 0.019), suggesting a link 
between serotonin and neurogenesis and neuroplasticity. However, after adjusting 
for multiple comparisons and controlling for confounding factors such as age, 
gender, education, and APOE genotypes (APOE3 and APOE4), none of the 
correlations of biomarkers remained statistically significant. In conclusion, 
increased serotonin levels are associated with improved cognitive function and 
increased brain volume. However, associations with CNTF, FGF-4, BMP-6, and MMP-1 
were not statistically significant after adjustments, highlighting the 
complexity of serotonin's role in AD and the need for further research.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13041-024-01169-4
PMCID: PMC11654273
PMID: 39696587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This study was conducted using ADNI data. The ADNI study is 
ethically approved and operated in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, 
1964. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing interests: There is no 
competing interests to be declared.


134. J Alzheimers Dis. 2024;99(1):263-277. doi: 10.3233/JAD-231047.

Improving Regression Analysis with Imputation in a Longitudinal Study of 
Alzheimer's Disease.

Chandrasekaran G(1), Xie SX(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Missing data is prevalent in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI). It is common to deal with missingness by removing subjects 
with missing entries prior to statistical analysis; however, this can lead to 
significant efficiency loss and sometimes bias. It has yet to be demonstrated 
that the imputation approach to handling this issue can be valuable in some 
longitudinal regression settings.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to demonstrate the importance of 
imputation and how imputation is correctly done in ADNI by analyzing 
longitudinal Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale -Cognitive Subscale 13 
(ADAS-Cog 13) scores and their association with baseline patient 
characteristics.
METHODS: We studied 1,063 subjects in ADNI with mild cognitive impairment. 
Longitudinal ADAS-Cog 13 scores were modeled with a linear mixed-effects model 
with baseline clinical and demographic characteristics as predictors. The model 
estimates obtained without imputation were compared with those obtained after 
imputation with Multiple Imputation by Chained Equations (MICE). We justify 
application of MICE by investigating the missing data mechanism and model 
assumptions. We also assess robustness of the results to the choice of 
imputation method.
RESULTS: The fixed-effects estimates of the linear mixed-effects model after 
imputation with MICE yield valid, tighter confidence intervals, thus improving 
the efficiency of the analysis when compared to the analysis done without 
imputation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates the importance of accounting for missing 
data in ADNI. When deciding to perform imputation, care should be taken in 
choosing the approach, as an invalid one can compromise the statistical 
analyses.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-231047
PMCID: PMC11068486
PMID: 38640151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest/Disclosure Statement The 
authors have no conflict of interest to report.


135. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2017 May;65(5):1067-1072. doi: 10.1111/jgs.14779. Epub 2017 
Feb 15.

Multicenter Validation of an MMSE-MoCA Conversion Table.

Bergeron D(1), Flynn K(2), Verret L(1), Poulin S(1), Bouchard RW(1), Bocti C(3), 
Fülöp T(3), Lacombe G(3), Gauthier S(4), Nasreddine Z(5), Laforce RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinique Interdisciplinaire de Mémoire, Département des Sciences 
Neurologiques du CHU de Québec, and Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, 
Québec, Québec, Canada.
(2)University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Université de Sherbrooke, 
Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada.
(4)Alzheimer's Disease Research Unit/Memory Clinic, McGill Centre for Studies in 
Aging, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(5)Neuro Rive-Sud/CEDRA: Centre Diagnostique et Recherche sur la Maladie 
d'Alzheimer, McGill University and Sherbrooke University, Montréal, Quebec, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidence points to the superiority of the MoCA over the 
MMSE as a cognitive screening tool. To facilitate the transition from the MMSE 
to the MoCA in clinical and research settings, authors have developed MMSE-MoCA 
conversion tables. However, it is unknown whether a conversion table generated 
from Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients would apply to patients with other 
dementia subtypes like vascular dementia or frontotemporal dementia. 
Furthermore, the reliability and accuracy of MMSE-MoCA conversion tables has not 
been properly evaluated.
METHOD: We retrospectively examined the MMSE-MoCA relationship in a large 
multicenter sample gathered from 3 Memory Clinics in Quebec, Canada (1492 
patients). We produced an MMSE-MoCA conversion table using the equi-percentile 
method with log-linear smoothing. We then cross-validated our conversion table 
with the ADNI dataset (1202 patients) and evaluated its accuracy for future 
predictions.
RESULTS: The MMSE-MoCA conversion table is consistent with previously published 
tables and has an intra-class correlation of 0.633 with the ADNI sample. 
However, we found that the MMSE-MoCA relationship is significantly modified by 
diagnosis (P < .01), with dementia subtypes associated with a dysexecutive 
syndrome showing a trend towards higher MMSE than other dementia syndromes for a 
given MoCA score. The large width of 95% confidence interval (CI) for a new 
prediction suggests questionable reliability for clinical use.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we validated a conversion table between MMSE and MoCA 
using a large multicenter sample. Our results suggest caution in interpreting 
the tables in heterogeneous clinical populations, as the MMSE-MoCA relationship 
may be different across dementia subtypes.

© 2017, Copyright the Authors Journal compilation © 2017, The American 
Geriatrics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jgs.14779
PMID: 28205215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2020 Jul;7(7):1225-1239. doi: 10.1002/acn3.51109. Epub 
2020 Jul 7.

Inflammatory pathway analytes predicting rapid cognitive decline in MCI stage of 
Alzheimer's disease.

Pillai JA(1)(2)(3), Bena J(4), Bebek G(5)(6), Bekris LM(7), Bonner-Jackson 
A(1)(2)(3), Kou L(4), Pai A(8)(9)(10), Sørensen L(8)(9)(10), Neilsen 
M(8)(9)(10), Rao SM(1)(2)(3), Chance M(5)(6), Lamb BT(11), Leverenz JB(1)(2)(3); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, 44195.
(2)Neurological Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, 44195.
(3)Department of Neurology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, 44195.
(4)Quantitative Health Sciences, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, 44195.
(5)Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio, 44195.
(6)Department of Nutrition, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, 
44195.
(7)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, 44195.
(8)Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(9)Biomediq A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(10)Cerebriu A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(11)Stark Neuroscience Research Institute, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, 46202.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the inflammatory analytes that predict clinical 
progression and evaluate their performance against biomarkers of 
neurodegeneration.
METHODS: A longitudinal study of MCI-AD patients in a Discovery cohort over 
15 months, with replication in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) MCI cohort over 36 months. Fifty-three inflammatory analytes were 
measured in the CSF and plasma with a RBM multiplex analyte platform. 
Inflammatory analytes that predict clinical progression on Clinical Dementia 
Rating Scale-Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) and Mini Mental State Exam scores were 
assessed in multivariate regression models. To provide context, key analyte 
results in ADNI were compared against biomarkers of neurodegeneration, 
hippocampal volume, and CSF neurofilament light (NfL), in receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) analyses evaluating highest quartile of CDR-SB change over 
two years (≥3 points).
RESULTS: Cerebrospinal fluid inflammatory analytes in relation to cognitive 
decline were best described by gene ontology terms, natural killer cell 
chemotaxis, and endothelial cell apoptotic process and in plasma, extracellular 
matrix organization, blood coagulation, and fibrin clot formation described the 
analytes. CSF CCL2 was most robust in predicting rate of cognitive change and 
analytes that correlated to CCL2 suggest IL-10 pathway dysregulation. The ROC 
curves for ≥3 points change in CDR-SB over 2 years when comparing baseline 
hippocampal volume, CSF NfL, and CCL2 were not significantly different.
INTERPRETATION: Baseline levels of immune cell chemotactic cytokine CCL2 in the 
CSF and IL-10 pathway dysregulation impact longitudinal cognitive and functional 
decline in MCI-AD. CCL2's utility appears comparable to biomarkers of 
neurodegeneration in predicting rapid decline.

© 2020 The Authors. Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/acn3.51109
PMCID: PMC7359114
PMID: 32634865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Jagan A Pillai has received research funding 
from the National Institutes of Health, Alzheimer’s Association and Keep Memory 
Alive foundation. Bruce T Lamb has received honoraria or consulting fees from 
Eli Lilly, Amgen, and Eisai, and research funding from the National Institutes 
of Health, US Department of Defense, the Alzheimer’s Association, and the 
BrightFocus Foundation. Stephen M. Rao has received honoraria, royalties, or 
consulting fees from: Biogen, Genzyme, Novartis, American Psychological 
Association, International Neuropsychological Society, and research funding from 
the National Institutes of Health, US Department of Defense, National Multiple 
Sclerosis Society, CHDI Foundation, Biogen, and Novartis. James B. Leverenz has 
received a) Consulting fees from Acadia, Aptnyx, Biogen, Eisai, GE Healthcare, 
Sanofi, and Takeda b) Grant support from the Alzheimer’s Association, 
Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation, Biogen, Department of Defense, GE 
Healthcare, Genzyme/Sanofi, Lewy Body Dementia Association, Michael J Fox 
Foundation, National Institute of Health (NIA, NINDS). Mads Neilsen has shares 
in Cerebriu A/S. Akshay Pai has shares in Cerebriu A/S. Mark Chance: None. Lynn 
Bekris: None. Gurkan Bebek: None. James Bena: None. Lei Kou: None.


137. Neuroimage Clin. 2016 Dec 16;13:330-338. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2016.12.012. 
eCollection 2017.

Longitudinal changes in microstructural white matter metrics in Alzheimer's 
disease.

Mayo CD(1), Mazerolle EL(2), Ritchie L(3), Fisk JD(4), Gawryluk JR(1); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Victoria, PO Box 1700 STN CSC, 
Victoria, BC V8W 2Y2, Canada.
(2)Department of Radiology and the Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of 
Calgary, HSC 2905, 3330 Hospital Dr NW, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada.
(3)Department of Clinical Health Psychology, University of Manitoba, 350-771 
Bannatyne Avenue, Winnipeg, MB R3E 3N4, Canada.
(4)Psychology, Nova Scotia Health Authority, Queen Elizabeth II Health Centre, 
4066, 4th Floor, Abbie J. Lane Memorial Building, 5909 Veterans' Memorial Lane, 
Halifax, NS B3H 2E2, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, Dalhousie University, 
4066, Abbie J. Lane Memorial Building, 5909 Veterans' Memorial Lane, Halifax, NS 
B3H 2E2, Canada; Department of Psychology & Neuroscience, Dalhousie University, 
4066, Abbie J. Lane Memorial Building, 5909 Veterans' Memorial Lane, Halifax, NS 
B3H 2E2, Canada; Department of Medicine, Dalhousie University, 4066, Abbie J. 
Lane Memorial Building, 5909 Veterans' Memorial Lane, Halifax, NS B3H 2E2, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative 
disorder. Current avenues of AD research focus on pre-symptomatic biomarkers 
that will assist with early diagnosis of AD. The majority of magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) based biomarker research to date has focused on neuronal loss in 
grey matter and there is a paucity of research on white matter.
METHODS: Longitudinal DTI data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative 2 database were used to examine 1) the within-group microstructural 
white matter changes in individuals with AD and healthy controls at baseline and 
year one; and 2) the between-group microstructural differences in individuals 
with AD and healthy controls at both time points.
RESULTS: 1) Within-group: longitudinal Tract-Based Spatial Statistics revealed 
that individuals with AD and healthy controls both had widespread reduced 
fractional anisotropy (FA) and increased mean diffusivity (MD) with changes in 
the hippocampal cingulum exclusive to the AD group. 2) Between-group: relative 
to healthy controls, individuals with AD had lower FA and higher MD in the 
hippocampal cingulum, as well as the corpus callosum, internal and external 
capsule; corona radiata; posterior thalamic radiation; superior and inferior 
longitudinal fasciculus; fronto-occipital fasciculus; cingulate gyri; fornix; 
uncinate fasciculus; and tapetum.
CONCLUSION: The current results indicate that sensitivity to white matter 
microstructure is a promising avenue for AD biomarker research. Additional 
longitudinal studies on both white and grey matter are warranted to further 
evaluate potential clinical utility.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2016.12.012
PMCID: PMC5200876
PMID: 28066707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Sci Rep. 2024 Sep 16;14(1):21595. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-67389-9.

Progressive cervical cord atrophy parallels cognitive decline in Alzheimer's 
disease.

Emmenegger TM(#)(1), Seiler R(#)(2), Unschuld PG(3)(4), Freund P(#)(5)(6), Klohs 
J(#)(7)(8); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Spinal Cord Injury Center, Balgrist University Hospital, University of 
Zurich, Forchstrasse 340, 8008, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Institute for Biomedical Engineering, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, 
Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 27, 8093, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Geneva (UniGE), 1205, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(4)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, University Hospitals of Geneva (HUG), 1226, 
Thônex, Switzerland.
(5)Spinal Cord Injury Center, Balgrist University Hospital, University of 
Zurich, Forchstrasse 340, 8008, Zurich, Switzerland. patrick.freund@balgrist.ch.
(6)Zurich Neuroscience Center (ZNZ), Winterthurer Strasse 190, 8057, Zürich, 
Switzerland. patrick.freund@balgrist.ch.
(7)Institute for Biomedical Engineering, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, 
Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 27, 8093, Zurich, Switzerland. jan.klohs@bruker.com.
(8)Zurich Neuroscience Center (ZNZ), Winterthurer Strasse 190, 8057, Zürich, 
Switzerland. jan.klohs@bruker.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by progressive episodic memory 
dysfunction. A prominent hallmark of AD is gradual brain atrophy. Despite 
extensive research on brain pathology, the understanding of spinal cord 
pathology in AD and its association with cognitive decline remains understudied. 
We analyzed serial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans from the ADNI data 
repository to assess whether progressive cord atrophy is associated with 
clinical worsening. Cervical cord morphometry was measured in 45 patients and 49 
cognitively normal controls (CN) at two time points over 1.5 years. Regression 
analysis examined associations between cord atrophy rate and cognitive 
worsening. Cognitive and functional activity performance declined in patients 
during follow-up. Compared with controls, patients showed a greater rate of 
decline of the anterior-posterior width of the cross-sectional cord area per 
month (- 0.12%, p = 0.036). Worsening in the mini-mental state examination 
(MMSE), clinical dementia rating (CDR), and functional assessment questionnaire 
(FAQ) was associated with faster rates of cord atrophy (MMSE: r = 0.320, 
p = 0.037; CDR: r = - 0.361, p = 0.017; FAQ: r = - 0.398, p = 0.029). 
Progressive cord atrophy occurs in AD patients; its rate over time being 
associated with cognitive and functional activity decline.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-67389-9
PMCID: PMC11405669
PMID: 39284823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


139. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;78(2):573-585. doi: 10.3233/JAD-200680.

The Impact of Amyloid-β or Tau on Cognitive Change in the Presence of Severe 
Cerebrovascular Disease.

Jang H(1)(2)(3), Kim HJ(1)(2)(3), Choe YS(1)(3), Kim SJ(1)(3), Park S(1), Kim 
Y(4), Kim KW(5), Lyoo CH(6), Cho H(6), Ryu YH(7), Choi JY(7), DeCarli C(8), Na 
DL(1)(2)(3), Seo SW(1)(2)(3)(9)(10); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Neuroscience Center, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Samsung Alzheimer Research Center, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(4)Department of Neurology, Kangwon National University Hospital, Chuncheon, 
Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Neurology, Jeonbuk National University Medical School, Jeonju, 
Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Neurology, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(8)Department of Neurology and Center for Neuroscience, University of 
California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, SAIHST, Sungkyunkwan 
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(10)Department of Intelligent Precision Healthcare Convergence, Sungkyunkwan 
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: As Alzheimer's disease (AD) and cerebral small vessel disease (CSVD) 
commonly coexist, the interaction between two has been of the considerable 
interest.
OBJECTIVE: We determined whether the association of Aβ and tau with cognitive 
decline differs by the presence of significant CSVD.
METHODS: We included 60 subcortical vascular cognitive impairment (SVCI) from 
Samsung Medical Center and 82 Alzheimer's disease-related cognitive impairment 
(ADCI) from ADNI, who underwent Aβ (florbetaben or florbetapir) and tau 
(flortaucipir, FTP) PET imaging. They were retrospectively assessed for 5.0±3.9 
and 5.6±1.9 years with Clinical Dementia Rating-sum of boxes 
(CDR-SB)/Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). Mixed effects models were used to 
investigate the interaction between Aβ/tau and group on CDR-SB/MMSE changes.
RESULTS: The frequency of Aβ positivity (45% versus 54.9%, p = 0.556) and mean 
global FTP SUVR (1.17±0.21 versus 1.16±0.17, p = 0.702) were not different 
between the two groups. We found a significant interaction effect of Aβ 
positivity and SVCI group on CDR-SB increase/MMSE decrease 
(p = 0.013/p < 0.001), and a significant interaction effect of global FTP uptake 
and SVCI group on CDR-SB increase/MMSE decrease (p < 0.001 and p = 0.030). 
Finally, the interaction effects of regional tau and group were prominent in the 
Braak III/IV (p = 0.001) and V/VI (p = 0.003) not in Braak I/II region 
(p = 0.398).
CONCLUSION: The association between Aβ/tau and cognitive decline is stronger in 
SVCI than in ADCI. Therefore, our findings suggested that Aβ positivity or tau 
burden (particularly in the Braak III/IV or V/VI regions) and CSVD might 
synergistically affect cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-200680
PMID: 33016911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Eur Radiol. 2010 Mar;20(3):674-82. doi: 10.1007/s00330-009-1581-5. Epub 2009 Sep 
16.

Volume changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment: cognitive 
associations.

Evans MC(1), Barnes J, Nielsen C, Kim LG, Clegg SL, Blair M, Leung KK, Douiri A, 
Boyes RG, Ourselin S, Fox NC; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Dementia Research Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, 
WC1N 3BG, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the relationship between MRI-derived changes in whole-brain 
and ventricular volume with change in cognitive scores in Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and control subjects.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In total 131 control, 231 MCI and 99 AD subjects from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort with T1-weighted 
volumetric MRIs from baseline and 12-month follow-up were used to derive volume 
changes. Mini mental state examination (MMSE), Alzheimer's disease assessment 
scale (ADAS)-cog and trails test changes were calculated over the same period.
RESULTS: Brain atrophy rates and ventricular enlargement differed between 
subject groups (p < 0.0005) and in MCI and AD were associated with MMSE changes. 
Both measures were additionally associated with ADAS-cog and trails-B in MCI 
patients, and ventricular expansion was associated with ADAS-cog in AD patients. 
Brain atrophy (p < 0.0005) and ventricular expansion rates (p = 0.001) were 
higher in MCI subjects who progressed to AD within 12 months of follow-up 
compared with MCI subjects who remained stable. MCI subjects who progressed to 
AD within 12 months had similar atrophy rates to AD subjects.
CONCLUSION: Whole-brain atrophy rates and ventricular enlargement differed 
between patient groups and healthy controls, and tracked disease progression and 
psychological decline, demonstrating their relevance as biomarkers.

DOI: 10.1007/s00330-009-1581-5
PMID: 19760240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2019 Oct 18;11(1):85. doi: 10.1186/s13195-019-0539-3.

Participant and study partner prediction and identification of cognitive 
impairment in preclinical Alzheimer's disease: study partner vs. participant 
accuracy.

Ryan MM(1), Grill JD(2)(3)(4)(5), Gillen DL(6)(7); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, 
92697, USA. marymr@uci.edu.
(2)Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, University of 
California, Irvine, 92697, CA, USA. jgrill@uci.edu.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA. jgrill@uci.edu.
(4)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, Irvine, 
Irvine, CA, 92697, USA. jgrill@uci.edu.
(5)Institute for Clinical and Translational Science, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA. jgrill@uci.edu.
(6)Department of Statistics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, 
92697, USA. dgillen@uci.edu.
(7)Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, University of 
California, Irvine, 92697, CA, USA. dgillen@uci.edu.

BACKGROUND: Preclinical Alzheimer's disease (AD) clinical trials require 
participants to enroll with a study partner, a person who can attend visits and 
report changes in the participant's cognitive ability. Whether study partners, 
compared to participants themselves, provide added information about participant 
cognition in preclinical AD trials is an open question. We tested the hypothesis 
that study partners provide meaningful information related to participant 
cognition cross-sectionally and longitudinally, and assessed whether amyloid 
status modified observed effects.
METHODS: We assessed participant and study partner Everyday Cognition (ECog) 
scores and participant Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale 13-item cognitive 
subscale (ADAS13) data from 335 cognitively normal participant-partner dyads in 
the AD Neuroimaging Initiative. We used random forest and linear mixed effects 
(LME) models to predict ADAS13 scores as a function of participant and/or study 
partner ECog scores over time. LME models were adjusted for potential 
confounding factors, including APOE4 status, amyloid status, baseline age, years 
of education, and sex. Random forest models were split into the above factors, 
as well as race/ethnicity and other available neuropsychological battery test 
scores.
RESULTS: In random forest models predicting ADAS13 12 months from baseline, we 
observed no difference in the estimated mean variable importance (eMVI) 
associated with baseline study partner ECog compared to the baseline participant 
ECog (eMVI = 0.15, 95%CB 0.13, 0.16 for partner; eMVI = 0.15, 95%CB 0.14, 0.16 
for participant). In models predicting ADAS13 48 months after baseline, the eMVI 
associated with baseline study partner ECog was slightly lower than that 
associated with baseline participant ECog (eMVI = 0.21, 95%CB 0.20, 0.22 for 
partner; eMVI = 0.24, 95%CB 0.22, 0.25 for participant). In cross-sectional 
models, study partner eMVI was twice as large as participant eMVI at 12 months 
(eMVI = 0.20, 95%CB 0.19, 0.21 for partner; eMVI = 0.09, 95%CB 0.09, 0.10 for 
participant) and three times as large at 48 months (eMVI = 0.38, 95%CB 0.36, 
0.39 for partner; eMVI = 0.13, 95%CB 0.12, 0.14 for participant). We did not 
observe qualitative differences by amyloid status.
CONCLUSIONS: While baseline participant reports reasonably predict subsequent 
cognitive change, informants perform better at cross-sectionally recognizing 
cognitive status as observation time grows. The study partner requirement may be 
essential to ensure trial data integrity, especially in longer trials.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-019-0539-3
PMCID: PMC6800492
PMID: 31627738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


142. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;55(4):1571-1582. doi: 10.3233/JAD-160850.

Histogram-Based Feature Extraction from Individual Gray Matter Similarity-Matrix 
for Alzheimer's Disease Classification.

Beheshti I(1), Maikusa N(1), Matsuda H(1), Demirel H(2), Anbarjafari G(3)(4); 
Japanese-Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Integrative Brain Imaging Center, National Center of Neurology and 
Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Biomedical Image Processing Group, Department of Electrical & Electronic 
Engineering, Eastern Mediterranean University, Famagusta, Mersin 10, Turkey.
(3)iCV Research Group, Institute of Technology, University of Tartu, Tartu, 
Estonia.
(4)Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Hasan Kalyoncu 
University, Gaziantep, Turkey.

Automatic computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems have been widely used in 
classification of patients who suffer from Alzheimer's disease (AD). This paper 
presents an automatic CAD system based on histogram feature extraction from 
single-subject gray matter similarity-matrix for classifying the AD patients 
from healthy controls (HC) using structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
data. The proposed CAD system is composed of five stages. In the first stage, 
segmentation is employed to perform pre-processing on the MRI images, and 
segment into gray matter, white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid using the 
voxel-based morphometric toolbox procedure. In the second stage, gray matter MRI 
scans are used to construct similarity-matrices. In the third stage, a novel 
statistical feature-generation process is proposed, utilizing the histogram of 
the individual similarity-matrix to represent statistical patterns of the 
respective similarity-matrices of different size and order into fixed-size 
feature-vectors. In the fourth stage, we propose to combine MRI measures with a 
neuropsychological test, the Functional Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ), to 
improve the classification accuracy. Finally, the classification is performed 
using a support vector machine and evaluated with the 10-fold cross-validation 
strategy. We evaluated the proposed method on 99 AD and 102 HC subjects from the 
J-ADNI. The proposed CAD system yields an 84.07% classification accuracy using 
MRI measures and 97.01% for combining MRI measures with FAQ scores, 
respectively. The experimental results indicate that the performance of the 
proposed system is competitive with respect to state-of-the-art techniques 
reported in the literature.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-160850
PMID: 27886012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Front Aging Neurosci. 2023 Nov 15;15:1285333. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2023.1285333. 
eCollection 2023.

APOE4 allele-specific associations between diet, multimodal biomarkers, and 
cognition among Puerto Rican adults in Massachusetts.

Guan Y(#)(1), Cheng CH(#)(1), Bellomo LI(1), Narain S(1), Bigornia SJ(2), 
Garelnabi MO(3), Scott T(4), Ordovás JM(5)(6)(7), Tucker KL(8)(9), Bhadelia 
R(10), Koo BB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Boston University Chobanian and 
Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States.
(2)Department of Agriculture, Nutrition, and Food Systems, College of Life 
Sciences and Agriculture, University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH, United 
States.
(3)Department of Public Health, Zuckerberg College of Health Sciences, 
University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA, United States.
(4)School of Medicine, Tufts University, Boston, MA, United States.
(5)Nutrition and Genomics Laboratory, J.M.-US Department of Agriculture Human 
Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(6)IMDEA Alimentacion, Madrid, Spain.
(7)CIBER Fisiopatologia de la Obesidad y la Nutricion (CIBEROBN), Instituto de 
Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Department of Biomedical and Nutritional Sciences, Zuckerberg College of 
Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA, United States.
(9)Center for Population Health, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA, 
United States.
(10)Neuroradiology Section, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Front Aging Neurosci. 2023 Dec 12;15:1343591. doi: 
10.3389/fnagi.2023.1343591.

BACKGROUND: Apolipoprotein E (APOE) is the strongest genetic risk factor for 
sporadic Alzheimer's Disease (AD), and the ε4 allele (APOE4) may interact with 
lifestyle factors that relate to brain structural changes, underlying the 
increased risk of AD. However, the exact role of APOE4 in mediating interactions 
between the peripheral circulatory system and the central nervous system, and 
how it may link to brain and cognitive aging requires further elucidation. In 
this analysis, we investigated the association between APOE4 carrier status and 
multimodal biomarkers (diet, blood markers, clinical diagnosis, brain structure, 
and cognition) in the context of gene-environment interactions.
METHODS: Participants were older adults from a longitudinal observational study, 
the Boston Puerto Rican Health Study (BPRHS), who self-identified as of Puerto 
Rican descent. Demographics, APOE genotype, diet, blood, and clinical data were 
collected at baseline and at approximately 12th year, with the addition of 
multimodal brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (T1-weighted and diffusion) 
and cognitive testing acquired at 12-year. Measures were compared between APOE4 
carriers and non-carriers, and associations between multimodal variables were 
examined using correlation and multivariate network analyses within each group.
RESULTS: A total of 156 BPRHS participants (mean age at imaging = 68 years, 77% 
female, mean follow-up 12.7 years) with complete multimodal data were included 
in the current analysis. APOE4 carriers (n = 43) showed reduced medial temporal 
lobe (MTL) white matter (WM) microstructural integrity and lower mini-mental 
state examination (MMSE) score than non-carriers (n = 113). This pattern was 
consistent with an independent sample from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) of n = 283 non-Hispanic White adults without dementia (mean 
age = 75, 40% female). Within BPRHS, carriers showed distinct connectivity 
patterns between multimodal biomarkers, characterized by stronger direct network 
connections between baseline diet/blood markers with 12-year blood/clinical 
measures, and between blood markers (especially lipids and cytokines) and WM. 
Cardiovascular burden (i.e., hypertension and diabetes status) was associated 
with WM integrity for both carriers and non-carriers.
CONCLUSION: APOE4 carrier status affects interactions between dietary factors, 
multimodal blood biomarkers, and MTL WM integrity across ~12 years of follow-up, 
which may reflect increased peripheral-central systems crosstalk following 
blood-brain barrier breakdown in carriers.

Copyright © 2023 Guan, Cheng, Bellomo, Narain, Bigornia, Garelnabi, Scott, 
Ordovás, Tucker, Bhadelia and Koo.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2023.1285333
PMCID: PMC10684694
PMID: 38035273

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.


144. PLoS One. 2016 May 16;11(5):e0154406. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0154406. 
eCollection 2016.

Potential Clinical Value of Multiparametric PET in the Prediction of Alzheimer's 
Disease Progression.

Chen X(1)(2), Zhou Y(1)(2), Wang R(1), Cao H(3), Reid S(2), Gao R(2)(4), Han 
D(5); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 
China.
(2)The Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of 
America.
(3)University Hospital, Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xian 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(5)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Oakland University, 
Rochester, Michigan, United States of America.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the potential clinical value of quantitative functional 
FDG PET and pathological amyloid-β PET with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers 
and clinical assessments in the prediction of Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
progression.
METHODS: We studied 82 subjects for up to 96 months (median = 84 months) in a 
longitudinal Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) project. All 
preprocessed PET images were spatially normalized to standard Montreal 
Neurologic Institute space. Regions of interest (ROI) were defined on MRI 
template, and standard uptake values ratios (SUVRs) to the cerebellum for FDG 
and amyloid-β PET were calculated. Predictive values of single and 
multiparametric PET biomarkers with and without clinical assessments and CSF 
biomarkers for AD progression were evaluated using receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) analysis and logistic regression model.
RESULTS: The posterior precuneus and cingulate SUVRs were identified for both 
FDG and amyloid-β PET in predicating progression in normal controls (NCs) and 
subjects with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). FDG parietal and lateral temporal 
SUVRs were suggested for monitoring NCs and MCI group progression, respectively. 
18F-AV45 global cortex attained (78.6%, 74.5%, 75.4%) (sensitivity, specificity, 
accuracy) in predicting NC progression, which is comparable to the 11C-PiB 
global cortex SUVR's in predicting MCI to AD. A logistic regression model to 
combine FDG parietal and posterior precuneus SUVR and Alzheimer's Disease 
Assessment Scale-Cognitive (ADAS-Cog) Total Mod was identified in predicating NC 
progression with (80.0%, 94.9%, 93.9%) (sensitivity, specificity, accuracy). The 
selected model including FDG posterior cingulate SUVR, ADAS-Cog Total Mod, and 
Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) scores for predicating MCI to AD attained (96.4%, 
81.2%, 83.6%) (sensitivity, specificity, accuracy). 11C-PiB medial temporal SUVR 
with MMSE significantly increased 11C-PiB PET AUC to 0.915 (p<0.05) in 
predicating MCI to AD with (77.8%, 90.4%, 88.5%) (sensitivity, specificity, 
accuracy).
CONCLUSION: Quantitative FDG and 11C-PiB PET with clinical cognitive assessments 
significantly improved accuracy in the predication of AD progression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0154406
PMCID: PMC4868310
PMID: 27183116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have the 
following interests: Data collection and sharing for this project was funded by 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) (National Institutes of 
Health Grant U01 AG024904) and DOD ADNI (Department of Defense award number 
W81XWH-12-2-0012). ADNI is funded by the National Institute on Aging, the 
National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, and through 
generous contributions from the following: Alzheimer’s Association; Alzheimer’s 
Drug Discovery Foundation; Araclon Biotech; BioClinica, Inc.; Biogen Idec Inc.; 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company; Eisai Inc.; Elan Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Eli Lilly 
and Company; EuroImmun; F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd and its affiliated company 
Genentech, Inc.; Fujirebio; GE Healthcare IXICO Ltd.; Janssen Alzheimer 
Immunotherapy Research & Development, LLC.; Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical 
Research & Development LLC.; Medpace, Inc.; Merck & Co., Inc.; Meso Scale 
Diagnostics, LLC.; NeuroRx Research; Neurotrack Technologies; Novartis 
Pharmaceuticals Corporation; Pfizer Inc.; Piramal Imaging; Servier; Synarc Inc.; 
and Takeda Pharmaceutical Company. The Canadian Institutes of Health Research is 
providing funds to support ADNI clinical sites in Canada. Private sector 
contributions are facilitated by the Foundation for the National Institutes of 
Health (www.fnih.org). The grantee organization is the Northern California 
Institute for Research and Education, and the study is coordinated by the 
Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study at the University of California, San 
Diego. ADNI data are disseminated by the Laboratory for Neuro Imaging at the 
University of Southern California. There are no patents, products in development 
or marketed products to declare. This does not alter the authors’ adherence to 
all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


145. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;43(3):1059-72. doi: 10.3233/JAD-141068.

Brain changes in Alzheimer's disease patients with implanted encapsulated cells 
releasing nerve growth factor.

Ferreira D(1), Westman E(1), Eyjolfsdottir H(2), Almqvist P(3), Lind G(3), 
Linderoth B(3), Seiger A(4), Blennow K(5), Karami A(1), Darreh-Shori T(1), 
Wiberg M(6), Simmons A(7), Wahlund LO(2), Wahlberg L(8), Eriksdotter M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden Department of Geriatrics, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden 
Department of Neurosurgery, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden Department of Geriatrics, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden Stockholms Sjukhem, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, 
University of Göteborg, Mölndal Campus, Sweden.
(6)Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology, Division of 
Medical Imaging and Technology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden 
Department of Radiology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Department of Neuroimaging, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(8)NsGene Inc., Rhode Island, USA.

New therapies with disease-modifying effects are urgently needed for treating 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Nerve growth factor (NGF) protein has demonstrated 
regenerative and neuroprotective effects on basal forebrain cholinergic neurons 
in animal studies. In addition, AD patients treated with NGF have previously 
shown improved cognition, EEG activity, nicotinic binding, and glucose 
metabolism. However, no study to date has analyzed brain atrophy in patients 
treated with NGF producing cells. In this study we present MRI results of the 
first clinical trial in patients with AD using encapsulated NGF biodelivery to 
the basal forebrain. Six AD patients received the treatment during twelve 
months. Patients were grouped as responders and non-responders according to 
their twelve-months change in MMSE. Normative values were created from 131 AD 
patients from ADNI, selecting 36 age- and MMSE-matched patients for interpreting 
the longitudinal changes in MMSE and brain atrophy. Results at baseline 
indicated that responders showed better clinical status and less pathological 
levels of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Aβ1-42. However, they showed more brain 
atrophy, and neuronal degeneration as evidenced by higher CSF levels of T-tau 
and neurofilaments. At follow-up, responders showed less brain shrinkage and 
better progression in the clinical variables and CSF biomarkers. Noteworthy, two 
responders showed less brain shrinkage than the normative ADNI group. These 
results together with previous evidence supports the idea that encapsulated 
biodelivery of NGF might have the potential to become a new treatment strategy 
for AD with both symptomatic and disease-modifying effects.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-141068
PMID: 25147108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Comput Biol Med. 2023 Oct;165:107396. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.107396. 
Epub 2023 Aug 26.

DE-JANet: A unified network based on dual encoder and joint attention for 
Alzheimer's disease classification using multi-modal data.

Dai Y(1), Zou B(1), Zhu C(2), Li Y(1), Chen Z(1), Ji Z(1), Kui X(3), Zhang W(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, 
Changsha, China; Hunan Engineering Research Center of Machine Vision and 
Intelligent Medicine, Changsha, China.
(2)School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, 
Changsha, China; Hunan Engineering Research Center of Machine Vision and 
Intelligent Medicine, Changsha, China. Electronic address: anandawork@126.com.
(3)School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.
(4)Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI), which can reflect cerebral 
atrophy, plays an important role in the early detection of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). However, the information provided by analyzing only the morphological 
changes in sMRI is relatively limited, and the assessment of the atrophy degree 
is subjective. Therefore, it is meaningful to combine sMRI with other clinical 
information to acquire complementary diagnosis information and achieve a more 
accurate classification of AD. Nevertheless, how to fuse these multi-modal data 
effectively is still challenging. In this paper, we propose DE-JANet, a unified 
AD classification network that integrates image data sMRI with non-image 
clinical data, such as age and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score, for 
more effective multi-modal analysis. DE-JANet consists of three key components: 
(1) a dual encoder module for extracting low-level features from the image and 
non-image data according to specific encoding regularity, (2) a joint attention 
module for fusing multi-modal features, and (3) a token classification module 
for performing AD-related classification according to the fused multi-modal 
features. Our DE-JANet is evaluated on the ADNI dataset, with a mean accuracy of 
0.9722 and 0.9538 for AD classification and mild cognition impairment (MCI) 
classification, respectively, which is superior to existing methods and 
indicates advanced performance on AD-related diagnosis tasks.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.107396
PMID: 37703717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


147. Eur J Med Res. 2023 Oct 12;28(1):427. doi: 10.1186/s40001-023-01265-6.

Bayesian estimation for the accuracy of three neuropsychological tests in 
detecting Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment: a retrospective 
analysis of the ADNI database.

Wang X(#)(1)(2), Li F(#)(1)(2), Tian J(1)(2), Gao Q(3)(4), Zhu H(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health, 
Capital Medical University, No. 10, Xi Toutiao You Anmenwai, Beijing, 100069, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of Clinical Epidemiology, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health, 
Capital Medical University, No. 10, Xi Toutiao You Anmenwai, Beijing, 100069, 
People's Republic of China. gaoqi@ccmu.edu.cn.
(4)Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of Clinical Epidemiology, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, People's Republic of China. gaoqi@ccmu.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Maternal and Child Health, School of Public Health, Capital 
Medical University, No. 10, Xi Toutiao You Anmenwai, Beijing, 100069, People's 
Republic of China. zhuhuiping@ccmu.edu.cn.
(6)Laboratory for Gene-Environment and Reproductive Health, Laboratory for 
Clinical Medicine, Capital Medical University, Beijing, People's Republic of 
China. zhuhuiping@ccmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The neuropathological confirmation serves as the gold standard for 
diagnosing Alzheimer's disease (AD), but it is usually not available to the 
living individuals. In addition, the gold standard for diagnosing Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (MCI) remains unclear yet. Neuropsychological testing, such as the 
Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-cog), is commonly 
used tests in identifying AD and MCI, offering convenience, affordability, 
non-invasiveness, and accessibility in clinical settings. We aimed to accurately 
evaluate the discriminative ability of the three tests administrated at the same 
visit simultaneously in detecting AD and MCI due to AD in the absence of a gold 
standard.
METHODS: A total of 1289 participants aged over 65 were included from the 
baseline visits of Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Bayesian latent 
class models, accounting for conditional dependence between MoCA and MMSE, were 
conducted to assess the diagnostic accuracy of the three tests for detecting AD 
and MCI.
RESULTS: In detecting AD, the ADAS-cog had the highest Youden's Index (0.829), 
followed by the MoCA(0.813) and MMSE(0.796). The ADAS-cog and MoCA showed 
similar sensitivity (0.922 vs 0.912) and specificity (0.907 vs 0.901), while the 
MMSE had lower sensitivity (0.874) and higher specificity (0.922). For MCI 
detection, the ADAS-cog had the highest Youden's Index (0.704) compared to the 
MoCA (0.614) and MMSE (0.478). The ADAS-cog exhibited the highest sensitivity, 
closely followed by the MoCA and MMSE (0.869 vs 0.845 vs 0.757), and the 
ADAS-cog also had good specificity (0.835 vs 0.769 vs 0.721). The estimated true 
prevalence of AD among individuals aged over 65 was 20.0%, and the estimated 
true prevalence of MCI due to AD was 24.8%.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that the ADAS-cog and MoCA are reliable tools 
for detecting AD and MCI, while the MMSE may be less sensitive in detecting 
these conditions. A large underdiagnosis of the MCI and Alzheimer's population 
still remains in clinical screening.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s40001-023-01265-6
PMCID: PMC10568914
PMID: 37821912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


148. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2024;11(5):1198-1205. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2024.110.

Performance of Plasma Biomarkers Combined with Structural MRI to Identify 
Candidate Participants for Alzheimer's Disease-Modifying Therapy.

Manjavong M(1), Kang JM, Diaz A, Ashford MT, Eichenbaum J, Aaronson A, Miller 
MJ, Mackin S, Tank R, Weiner M, Nosheny R.

Author information:
(1)Rachel L. Nosheny, Ph.D., Assistant Professor, University of California, San 
Francisco, Department of Psychiatry, San Francisco VA Medical Center, 4150 
Clement Street (114M), San Francisco, CA 94121, Tel: 650-468-0619, Fax: 
415-668-2864, email: rachel.nosheny@ucsf.edu.

BACKGROUND: Recently, two monoclonal antibodies that lower amyloid plaques have 
shown promising results for the treatment of Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and 
mild dementia due to Alzheimer's disease (AD). These treatments require the 
identification of cognitively impaired older adults with biomarker evidence of 
AD pathology using CSF biomarkers or amyloid-PET. Previous studies showed plasma 
biomarkers (plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 and p-tau181) and hippocampal volume from 
structural MRI correlated with brain amyloid pathology. We hypothesized plasma 
biomarkers with hippocampal volume would identify patients who are suitable 
candidates for disease-modifying therapy.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the performance of plasma AD biomarkers and hippocampal 
atrophy to detect MCI or AD with amyloid pathology confirmed by amyloid-PET or 
CSF biomarkers in ADNI.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional and longitudinal study.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: Data were from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative. Participants were aged 55-90 years old with plasma biomarker and 
structural MRI brain data.
MEASUREMENTS: The optimum cut-off point for plasma Aβ42/Aβ40, p-tau181, and NFL 
and the performance of combined biomarkers and hippocampal atrophy for detecting 
cognitive impairment with brain amyloid pathology were evaluated. The 
association between baseline plasma biomarkers and clinical progression, defined 
by CDR-Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) and diagnostic conversion over two years, was 
evaluated using a Weibull time-to-event analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 428 participants were included; 167 had normal cognition, 
245 had MCI, and 16 had mild AD. Among MCI and AD, 140 participants had elevated 
amyloid levels by PET or CSF. Plasma Aβ42/Aβ40 provided the best accuracy 
(sensitivity 79%, specificity 66%, AUC 0.73, 95% CI 0.68-0.77) to detect drug 
candidate participants at baseline. Combined plasma Aβ42/40, p-tau181, and 
hippocampal atrophy increased the specificity for diagnosis (96%), but had lower 
sensitivity (34%), and AUC (0.65). Hippocampal atrophy combined with the 
abnormal plasma p-tau181 or hippocampal atrophy alone showed high sensitivity to 
detect clinical progression (by CDR-SB worsening) of the drug-candidate 
participants within the next 2 years (sensitivity 93% and 89%, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Plasma biomarkers and structural MRI can help identify patients who 
are currently eligible for anti-amyloid treatment and are likely to progress 
clinically, in cases where amyloid-PET or CSF biomarkers are not available.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2024.110
PMCID: PMC11436390
PMID: 39350364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MM – Dr. Manchumad Manjavong has no conflict of 
interest to declare. JK – Dr. Jae Myeong Kang has no conflict of interest to 
declare. AD – Adam Diaz has no conflict of interest to declare. MTA - Dr. Miriam 
T. Ashford receives funding to her institution from NIH. JE – Joseph Eichenbaum 
has no conflict of interest to declare. AA – Anna Aaronson has no conflict of 
interest to declare. MJM – Dr. Melanie J. Miller has no conflict of interest to 
declare. RSM – Dr. R. Scott Mackin has received research support from The 
National Institute of Mental Health, the National Institute of Aging, and 
Johnson and Johnson, during the past 2 years. RT – Dr. Rachana Tank has no 
conflict of interest to declare. MWW- Dr. Weiner reports grants from National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), grants from Department of Defense (DOD), grants from 
Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI), grants from California 
Department of Public Health (CDPH), grants from University of Michigan, grants 
from Siemens, grants from Biogen, grants from Hillblom Foundation, grants from 
Alzheimer’s Association, grants from The State of California, grants from 
Johnson & Johnson, grants from Kevin and Connie Shanahan, grants from GE, grants 
from VUmc, grants from Australian Catholic University (HBI- BHR), grants from 
The Stroke Foundation, grants from Veterans Administration, personal fees from 
Acumen Pharmaceutical, personal fees from Cerecin, personal fees from Dolby 
Family Ventures, personal fees from Eli Lilly, personal fees from Merck Sharp & 
Dohme Corp., personal fees from National Institute on Aging (NIA), personal fees 
from Nestle/Nestec, personal fees from PCORI/PPRN, personal fees from Roche, 
personal fees from University of Southern California (USC), personal fees from 
NervGen, personal fees from Baird Equity Capital, personal fees from BioClinica, 
personal fees from Cytox, personal fees from Duke University, personal fees from 
Eisai, personal fees from FUJIFILM-Toyama Chemical (Japan), personal fees from 
Garfield Weston, personal fees from Genentech, personal fees from Guidepoint 
Global, personal fees from Indiana University, personal fees from Japanese 
Organization for Medical Device Development, Inc. (JOMDD), personal fees from 
Medscape, personal fees from Peerview Internal Medicine, personal fees from 
Roche, personal fees from T3D Therapeutics, personal fees from WebMD, personal 
fees from Vida Ventures, personal fees from The Buck Institute for Research on 
Aging, personal fees from China Association for Alzheimer’s Disease (CAAD), 
personal fees from Japan Society for Dementia Research, personal fees from 
Korean Dementia Society, outside the submitted work; and I hold stocks or 
options with Alzheon Inc., Alzeca, and Anven. RLN - Dr. Rachel L. Nosheny 
reports funding from the National Institutes of Health (grants to institution), 
California Department of Public Health (grants to institution), and Genentech 
Inc. (grants to institution).


149. Neurosci Lett. 2021 Jun 21;756:135955. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2021.135955. Epub 
2021 May 9.

Association of obstructive sleep apnea with cognitive decline and age among 
non-demented older adults.

Pan T(1), Liu S(1), Ke S(1), Wang E(1), Jiang Y(1), Wang S(2); on the behalf of 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Taizhou Hospital of Zhejiang Province Affiliated to 
Wenzhou Medical University, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Taizhou Hospital of Zhejiang Province Affiliated to 
Wenzhou Medical University, China. Electronic address: 
wangshanshan19896@163.com.

We aimed to investigate whether obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) status affects the 
relationship between cognitive decline and age among non-demented elderly 
people. A total of 1422 participants (493 normal cognition and 929 amnestic mild 
cognitive impairment) were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) cohort. Based on the self-reported medical history of OSA, 
participants were categorized into two groups (OSA- and OSA +). Multiple linear 
regression models were performed to assess the effect of the OSA * Age 
interaction on MMSE, ADAS-cog11 and RAVLT immediate recall in non-demented group 
and in APOE ε4 carriers/non-carriers adjusting for gender and educational 
attainment. In the present study, the OSA + group demonstrated significant 
cognitive decline versus the OSA- group. In addition, in APOE ε4- group, our 
findings showed a significant OSA * age interaction for ADAS-cog11 and RVALT 
immediate recall, but not MMSE. No significant interaction was observed in the 
APOE ε4+ individuals. In conclusion, our findings implicate that OSA status may 
affect the association of age with cognitive impairment among non-demented older 
people.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2021.135955
PMID: 33979700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Alzheimers Dis. 2023;94(2):627-640. doi: 10.3233/JAD-230180.

Detection of Tau-PET Positivity in Clinically Diagnosed Mild Cognitive 
Impairment with Multidimensional Features.

Li B(1), Shi K(1), Ren C(1), Kong M(2), Ba M(1)(3); for Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of Qingdao 
University, Yantai, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Yantaishan Hospital, Yantai, Shandong, China.
(3)Yantai Regional Sub Center of National Center for Clinical Medical Research 
of Neurological Diseases, Shandong, China.

BACKGROUND: The way to evaluate brain tau pathology in vivo is tau positron 
emission tomography (tau-PET) or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis. In the 
clinically diagnosed mild cognitive impairment (MCI), a proportion of tau-PET 
are negative. Interest in less expensive and convenient ways to detect tau 
pathology in Alzheimer's disease has increased due to the high cost of tau-PET 
and the invasiveness of lumbar puncture, which typically slows down the cost and 
enrollment of clinical trials.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to investigate one simple and effective method in predicting 
tau-PET status in MCI individuals.
METHODS: The sample included 154 individuals which were dichotomized into 
tau-PET (+) and tau-PET (-) using a cut-off of >1.33. We used stepwise 
regression to select the unitary or combination of variables that best predicted 
tau-PET. The receiver operating characteristic curve was used to assess the 
accuracy of single and multiple clinical markers.
RESULTS: The combined performance of three variables [Alzheimer's Disease 
Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale 13 (ADAS-Cog13), Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE), ADNI-Memory summary score (ADNI-MEM)] in neurocognitive 
measures demonstrated good predictive accuracy of tau-PET status 
[accuracy = 85.7%, area under the curve (AUC) = 0.879]. The combination of 
clinical markers model (APOEɛ4, neurocognitive measures and structural MRI 
imaging of middle temporal) had the best discriminative power (AUC = 0.946).
CONCLUSION: As a noninvasive test, the combination of APOEɛ4, neurocognitive 
measures and structural MRI imaging of middle temporal accurately predicts 
tau-PET status. The finding may provide a non-invasive, cost-effective tool for 
clinical application in predicting tau pathology among MCI individuals.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-230180
PMID: 37334600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Neurobiol Aging. 2011 Jul;32(7):1207-18. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.07.002. Epub 2009 Aug 5.

Associations between cognitive, functional, and FDG-PET measures of decline in 
AD and MCI.

Landau SM(1), Harvey D, Madison CM, Koeppe RA, Reiman EM, Foster NL, Weiner MW, 
Jagust WJ; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California-Berkeley, CA 
94720-3190, USA. slandau@berkeley.edu

The Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ) and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-cognitive subscale (ADAS-cog) are frequently used indices of cognitive 
decline in Alzheimer's disease (AD). The goal of this study was to compare 
FDG-PET and clinical measurements in a large sample of elderly subjects with 
memory disturbance. We examined relationships between glucose metabolism in 
FDG-PET regions of interest (FDG-ROIs), and ADAS-cog and FAQ scores in AD and 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) patients enrolled in the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Low glucose metabolism at baseline predicted 
subsequent ADAS-cog and FAQ decline. In addition, longitudinal glucose 
metabolism decline was associated with concurrent ADAS-cog and FAQ decline. 
Finally, a power analysis revealed that FDG-ROI values have greater statistical 
power than ADAS-cog to detect attenuation of cognitive decline in AD and MCI 
patients. Glucose metabolism is a sensitive measure of change in cognition and 
functional ability in AD and MCI, and has value in predicting future cognitive 
decline.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.07.002
PMCID: PMC2891865
PMID: 19660834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure statement There are no potential or 
actual conflicts of interest.


152. J Alzheimers Dis. 2019;70(3):877-887. doi: 10.3233/JAD-180962.

Investigating the Association Between Verbal Forgetting and Pathological Markers 
of Alzheimer's and Lewy Body Diseases.

Schaeffer MJ(1), Callahan BL(1)(2)(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(2)Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(3)Mathison Centre for Mental Health Research & Education, Calgary, AB, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The percentage of verbal forgetting (VF%) measure of the Rey 
Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT) has been proposed to differentiate 
patients diagnosed clinically with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB).
OBJECTIVE: To determine if VF% aligns with gold-standard biomarker and autopsy 
evidence of AD and DLB neuropathology.
METHODS: Clinical, cognitive, sociodemographic, and biomarker data were 
collected from 315 patients with baseline cognitive impairment and 485 normal 
controls from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). AD markers 
included reduced cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) amyloid-β, elevated total-tau and 
phosphorylated-tau, hippocampal atrophy, and the presence of amyloid plaques and 
neurofibrillary tangles at autopsy. DLB markers included reduced CSF 
α-synuclein, preserved hippocampus, atrophied putamen, occipital glucose 
metabolism, and the presence of Lewy bodies at autopsy. Cognitively impaired 
participants were classified as ADVF% (n = 190) or DLBVF% (n = 125) based on 
their RAVLT VF% scores using a 75% cut-off (≥75%  = ADVF%, <75%  = DLBVF%). 
Postmortem data were available for 13 ADVF% participants, 13 DLBVF% patients, 
and six healthy controls.
RESULTS: ADVF% and DLBVF% participants did not differ on CSF or neuroimaging 
biomarkers, with the exception of total tau levels which were higher in ADVF%. 
In the subset of participants with autopsy data, comorbid AD and DLB pathology 
was most frequent in ADVF% participants, and pure DLB pathology was most 
frequent in DLBVF% participants, however, these differences were not 
statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: The RAVLT VF% measure does not reliably align with AD and DLB 
neuropathology in ADNI participants.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-180962
PMID: 31282412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Neuroimage. 2014 Jul 1;94:275-286. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.03.036. Epub 
2014 Mar 21.

Manifold population modeling as a neuro-imaging biomarker: application to ADNI 
and ADNI-GO.

Guerrero R(1), Wolz R(2), Rao AW(2), Rueckert D(2); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computing, Imperial College, London, UK. Electronic address: 
reg09@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Computing, Imperial College, London, UK.

We propose a framework for feature extraction from learned low-dimensional 
subspaces that represent inter-subject variability. The manifold subspace is 
built from data-driven regions of interest (ROI). The regions are learned via 
sparse regression using the mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score as an 
independent variable which correlates better with the actual disease stage than 
a discrete class label. The sparse regression is used to perform variable 
selection along with a re-sampling scheme to reduce sampling bias. We then use 
the learned manifold coordinates to perform visualization and classification of 
the subjects. Results of the proposed approach are shown using the ADNI and 
ADNI-GO datasets. Three types of classification techniques, including a new MRI 
Disease-State-Score (MRI-DSS) classifier, are tested in conjunction with two 
learning strategies. In the first case Alzheimer's Disease (AD) and progressive 
mild cognitive impairment (pMCI) subjects were grouped together, while cognitive 
normal (CN) and stable mild cognitive impaired (sMCI) subjects were also grouped 
together. In the second approach, the classifiers are learned using the original 
class labels (with no grouping). We show results that are comparable to other 
state-of-the-art methods. A classification rate of 71%, of arguably the most 
clinically relevant subjects, sMCI and pMCI, is shown. Additionally, we present 
classification accuracies between CN and early MCI (eMCI) subjects, from the 
ADNI-GO dataset, of 65%. To our knowledge this is the first time classification 
accuracies for eMCI patients have been reported.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.03.036
PMID: 24657351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Brain Imaging Behav. 2016 Sep;10(3):818-28. doi: 10.1007/s11682-015-9430-4.

Canonical feature selection for joint regression and multi-class identification 
in Alzheimer's disease diagnosis.

Zhu X(1), Suk HI(2), Lee SW(2), Shen D(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and BRIC, The University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seongbuk-gu, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Radiology and BRIC, The University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. dgshen@med.unc.edu.
(4)Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seongbuk-gu, 
Republic of Korea. dgshen@med.unc.edu.

Fusing information from different imaging modalities is crucial for more 
accurate identification of the brain state because imaging data of different 
modalities can provide complementary perspectives on the complex nature of brain 
disorders. However, most existing fusion methods often extract features 
independently from each modality, and then simply concatenate them into a long 
vector for classification, without appropriate consideration of the correlation 
among modalities. In this paper, we propose a novel method to transform the 
original features from different modalities to a common space, where the 
transformed features become comparable and easy to find their relation, by 
canonical correlation analysis. We then perform the sparse multi-task learning 
for discriminative feature selection by using the canonical features as 
regressors and penalizing a loss function with a canonical regularizer. In our 
experiments on the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset, 
we use Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Positron Emission Tomography (PET) 
images to jointly predict clinical scores of Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-Cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog) and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and 
also identify multi-class disease status for Alzheimer's disease diagnosis. The 
experimental results showed that the proposed canonical feature selection method 
helped enhance the performance of both clinical score prediction and disease 
status identification, outperforming the state-of-the-art methods.

DOI: 10.1007/s11682-015-9430-4
PMCID: PMC4747862
PMID: 26254746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests Xiaofeng Zhu, Heung-Il Suk 
and Dinggang Shen declare that they have no conflict of interests.


155. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2024;11(2):310-319. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2024.27.

Potential Implications of Slowing Disease Progression in Amyloid-Positive Early 
Alzheimer's Disease: Estimates from Real-World Data.

Chandler J(1), Done N, Desai U, Georgieva M, Gomez-Lievano A, Ye W, Zhao A, Eid 
D, Hilts A, Kirson N, Schilling T.

Author information:
(1)Urvi Desai, PhD, Analysis Group, Inc., 111 Huntington Avenue, 14th Floor, 
Boston, MA 02199, USA, Phone: +1-617-425-8315, Email: 
Urvi.Desai@analysisgroup.com.

BACKGROUND: Emerging therapies have shown promising results for slowing the 
progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the potential impact of these 
therapies on real-world outcomes remains to be explored.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the impact of slowing AD progression on functional 
abilities and behavioral symptoms.
DESIGN: Retrospective observational study.
SETTING: Data from the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC) Uniform 
Data Set (UDS) in the United States (06/2005-11/2021, primary analysis) and the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (09/2005-03/2022, 
sensitivity analysis) were used.
PARTICIPANTS: Individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or mild dementia, 
Clinical Dementia Rating Scale Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) score 0.5-9.0 (inclusive; 
first visit defined as the index date), and confirmed amyloid positivity were 
identified in NACC. In ADNI, individuals with at least one clinical center visit 
with a clinical assessment of MCI or mild dementia and confirmed amyloid 
positivity were identified.
MEASUREMENTS: Hypothetical effects of slowing disease progression as assessed by 
CDR-SB on functional and behavioral outcomes including the Functional Activities 
Questionnaire (FAQ) score, Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire (NPI-Q) 
score, and the probability of complete dependence over five years were evaluated 
using multivariable regression among NACC participants, separately for the 
subgroups with MCI and mild dementia at baseline, respectively. For the ADNI 
sensitivity analysis, the hypothetical effects of slowing disease progression 
were evaluated for FAQ score using multivariable regression among the MCI 
participants only.
RESULTS: Compared with natural disease progression, slowing progression by 20% 
over five years for NACC participants with MCI and mild dementia, respectively, 
would result in 1.7-point (10.8%) and 1.6-point (12.9%) less deterioration based 
on FAQ; 0.5-point (20.3%) and 0.5-point (19.3%) less deterioration based on 
NPI-Q; 4.7 percentage-point (22.2%) and 10.1 percentage-point (21.6%) lower 
probability of complete dependence. Among ADNI participants, delaying disease 
progression by 20% or 30% over 4 years would avert deterioration based on FAQ of 
1.1 points (20.4%) and 1.6 points (29.6%), respectively, compared to natural 
disease progression.
CONCLUSIONS: Slowing early AD progression could result in preservation of 
functional and behavioral attributes and functional autonomy for longer.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2024.27
PMID: 38374737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JMC, WY, and TS are employees of Eli Lilly and 
Company and hold stock or stock options in Eli Lilly and Company. MG, UD, NK, 
ND, AZ, DE, AGL, and AH are employees of Analysis Group, Inc., which received 
consulting fees from the study sponsor to conduct this research.


156. J Nucl Med. 2024 Sep 3;65(9):1473-1480. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.123.267273.

Advancing Tau PET Quantification in Alzheimer Disease with Machine Learning: 
Introducing THETA, a Novel Tau Summary Measure.

Gebre RK(1), Rial AM(2)(3), Raghavan S(1), Wiste HJ(4), Heeman F(2)(3), 
Costoya-Sánchez A(5)(6)(7), Schwarz CG(1), Spychalla AJ(1), Lowe VJ(1), 
Graff-Radford J(8), Knopman DS(8), Petersen RC(4)(8), Schöll M(2)(3)(9), Murray 
ME(10), Jack CR Jr(1), Vemuri P(11); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Wallenberg Centre for Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of 
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota.
(5)Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(6)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades 
Neurodegenerativas, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Nuclear Medicine Department and Molecular Imaging Group, Instituto de 
Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de Compostela, Travesía da Choupana s/n, 
Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(8)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(9)Dementia Research Centre, Institute of Neurology, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom; and.
(10)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida.
(11)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; 
vemuri.prasanthi@mayo.edu.

Update of
    Res Sq. 2023 Oct 18:rs.3.rs-3290598. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-3290598/v1.

Alzheimer disease (AD) exhibits spatially heterogeneous 3- or 4-repeat tau 
deposition across participants. Our overall goal was to develop an automated 
method to quantify the heterogeneous burden of tau deposition into a single 
number that would be clinically useful. Methods: We used tau PET scans from 3 
independent cohorts: the Mayo Clinic Study of Aging and Alzheimer's Disease 
Research Center (Mayo, n = 1,290), the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI, n = 831), and the Open Access Series of Imaging Studies 
(OASIS-3, n = 430). A machine learning binary classification model was trained 
on Mayo data and validated on ADNI and OASIS-3 with the goal of predicting 
visual tau positivity (as determined by 3 raters following Food and Drug 
Administration criteria for 18F-flortaucipir). The machine learning model used 
region-specific SUV ratios scaled to cerebellar crus uptake. We estimated 
feature contributions based on an artificial intelligence-explainable method 
(Shapley additive explanations) and formulated a global tau summary measure, Tau 
Heterogeneity Evaluation in Alzheimer's Disease (THETA) score, using SUV ratios 
and Shapley additive explanations for each participant. We compared the 
performance of THETA with that of commonly used meta-regions of interest (ROIs) 
using the Mini-Mental State Examination, the Clinical Dementia Rating-Sum of 
Boxes, clinical diagnosis, and histopathologic staging. Results: The model 
achieved a balanced accuracy of 95% on the Mayo test set and at least 87% on the 
validation sets. It classified tau-positive and -negative participants with an 
AUC of 1.00, 0.96, and 0.94 on the Mayo, ADNI, and OASIS-3 cohorts, 
respectively. Across all cohorts, THETA showed a better correlation with the 
Mini-Mental State Examination and the Clinical Dementia Rating-Sum of Boxes (ρ ≥ 
0.45, P < 0.05) than did meta-ROIs (ρ < 0.44, P < 0.05) and discriminated 
between participants who were cognitively unimpaired and those who had mild 
cognitive impairment with an effect size of 10.09, compared with an effect size 
of 3.08 for meta-ROIs. Conclusion: Our proposed approach identifies positive tau 
PET scans and provides a quantitative summary measure, THETA, that effectively 
captures heterogeneous tau deposition observed in AD. The application of THETA 
for quantifying tau PET in AD exhibits great potential.

© 2024 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.123.267273
PMCID: PMC11372256
PMID: 39054278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Neuroimage Clin. 2013 Jul 27;3:180-95. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2013.07.006. 
eCollection 2013.

Effectiveness of regional DTI measures in distinguishing Alzheimer's disease, 
MCI, and normal aging.

Nir TM(1), Jahanshad N, Villalon-Reina JE, Toga AW, Jack CR, Weiner MW, Thompson 
PM; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Imaging Genetics Center, Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Department of 
Neurology, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) recently added diffusion 
tensor imaging (DTI), among several other new imaging modalities, in an effort 
to identify sensitive biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease (AD). While anatomical 
MRI is the main structural neuroimaging method used in most AD studies and 
clinical trials, DTI is sensitive to microscopic white matter (WM) changes not 
detectable with standard MRI, offering additional markers of neurodegeneration. 
Prior DTI studies of AD report lower fractional anisotropy (FA), and increased 
mean, axial, and radial diffusivity (MD, AxD, RD) throughout WM. Here we 
assessed which DTI measures may best identify differences among AD, mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI), and cognitively healthy elderly control (NC) groups, 
in region of interest (ROI) and voxel-based analyses of 155 ADNI participants 
(mean age: 73.5 ± 7.4; 90 M/65 F; 44 NC, 88 MCI, 23 AD). Both VBA and ROI 
analyses revealed widespread group differences in FA and all diffusivity 
measures. DTI maps were strongly correlated with widely-used clinical ratings 
(MMSE, CDR-sob, and ADAS-cog). When effect sizes were ranked, FA analyses were 
least sensitive for picking up group differences. Diffusivity measures could 
detect more subtle MCI differences, where FA could not. ROIs showing strongest 
group differentiation (lowest p-values) included tracts that pass through the 
temporal lobe, and posterior brain regions. The left hippocampal component of 
the cingulum showed consistently high effect sizes for distinguishing groups, 
across all diffusivity and anisotropy measures, and in correlations with 
cognitive scores.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2013.07.006
PMCID: PMC3792746
PMID: 24179862


158. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 19;6(4):e16973. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016973.

Intra-individual variability in Alzheimer's disease and cognitive aging: 
definitions, context, and effect sizes.

Tractenberg RE(1), Pietrzak RH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Georgetown University School of Medicine, 
Washington, DC, United States of America. ret7@georgetown.edu

BACKGROUND/AIMS: To explore different definitions of intra-individual 
variability (IIV) to summarize performance on commonly utilized cognitive tests 
(Mini Mental State Exam; Clock Drawing Test); compare them and their potential 
to differentiate clinically-defined populations; and to examine their utility in 
predicting clinical change in individuals from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).
METHODS: Sample statistics were computed from ADNI cohorts with no cognitive 
diagnosis, a diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and a diagnosis of 
possible or probable Alzheimer's disease (AD). Nine different definitions of IIV 
were computed for each sample, and standardized effect sizes (Cohen's d) were 
computed for each of these definitions in 500 simulated replicates using scores 
on the Mini Mental State Exam and Clock Drawing Test. IIV was computed based on 
test items separately ('within test' IIV) and the two tests together ('across 
test' IIV). The best performing definition was then used to compute IIV for a 
third test, the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive, and the 
simulations and effect sizes were again computed. All effect size estimates 
based on simulated data were compared to those computed based on the total 
scores in the observed data. Association between total score and IIV summaries 
of the tests and the Clinician's Dementia Rating were estimated to test the 
utility of IIV in predicting clinically meaningful changes in the cohorts over 
12- and 24-month intervals.
RESULTS: ES estimates differed substantially depending on the definition of IIV 
and the test(s) on which IIV was based. IIV (coefficient of variation) summaries 
of MMSE and Clock-Drawing performed similarly to their total scores, the ADAS 
total performed better than its IIV summary.
CONCLUSION: IIV can be computed within (items) or across (totals) items on 
commonly-utilized cognitive tests, and may provide a useful additional summary 
measure of neuropsychological test performance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016973
PMCID: PMC3079725
PMID: 21526188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: RET is an academic editor 
at PLoS ONE. RHP declares no competing interests. ADNI is funded by the National 
Institute on Aging, the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and 
Bioengineering, and through generous contributions from the following: Abbott, 
AstraZeneca AB, Bayer Schering Pharma AG, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eisai Global 
Clinical Development, Elan Corporation, Genentech, GE Healthcare, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Innogenetics, Johnson and Johnson, Eli Lilly and Co., Medpace, 
Inc., Merck and Co., Inc., Novartis AG, Pfizer Inc, F. Hoffman-La Roche, 
Schering-Plough, Synarc, Inc., and Wyeth, as well as non-profit partners the 
Alzheimer's Association and Alzheimer's Drug Discovery Foundation, with 
participation from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Private sector 
contributions to ADNI are facilitated by the Foundation for the National 
Institutes of Health (www.fnih.org). The grantee organization is the Northern 
California Institute for Research and Education, and the study is coordinated by 
the Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study at the University of California, San 
Diego. ADNI data are disseminated by the Laboratory for Neuro-Imaging at the 
University of California, Los Angeles. This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


159. Brain Behav. 2018 Aug;8(8):e01020. doi: 10.1002/brb3.1020. Epub 2018 Jun 22.

The association between "Brain-Age Score" (BAS) and traditional 
neuropsychological screening tools in Alzheimer's disease.

Beheshti I(1), Maikusa N(1), Matsuda H(1).

Author information:
(1)Integrative Brain Imaging Center, National Center of Neurology and 
Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: We present the Brain-Age Score (BAS) as a magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI)-based index for Alzheimer's disease (AD). We developed a fully 
automated framework for estimating the BAS in healthy controls (HCs) and 
individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or AD, using MRI scans.
METHODS: We trained the proposed framework using 385 HCs from the IXI and OASIS 
datasets and evaluated 146 HCs, 102 stable-MCI (sMCI), 112 progressive-MCI 
(pMCI), and 147 AD patients from the J-ADNI dataset. We used a correlation test 
to determine the association between the BAS and four traditional screening 
tools of AD: the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Clinical Dementia Ratio 
(CDR), Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Score (ADAS), and Functional Assessment 
Questionnaire (FAQ). Furthermore, we assessed the association between BAS and 
anatomical MRI measurements: the normalized gray matter (nGM), normalized white 
matter (nWM), normalized cerebrospinal fluid (nCSF), mean cortical thickness as 
well as hippocampus volume.
RESULTS: The correlation results demonstrated that the BAS is in line with 
traditional screening tools of AD (i.e., the MMSE, CDR, ADAS, and FAQ scores) as 
well as anatomical MRI measurements (i.e., nGM, nCSF, mean cortical thickness, 
and hippocampus volume).
DISCUSSION: The BAS may be useful for diagnosing the brain atrophy level and can 
be a reliable automated index for clinical applications and neuropsychological 
screening tools.

© 2018 National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry. Brain and Behavior published 
by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.1020
PMCID: PMC6085898
PMID: 29931756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Neurobiol Aging. 2023 Jan;121:166-178. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2022.10.013. Epub 2022 Nov 5.

Association of longitudinal cognitive decline with diffusion MRI in Gray Matter, 
Amyloid, and Tau deposition.

Wang WE(1), Chen R(2), Mayrand RP(3), Adjouadi M(3), Fang R(4), DeKosky ST(5), 
Duara R(6), Coombes SA(1), Vaillancourt DE(7); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Physiology and Kinesiology, University of Florida; 
Gainesville, FL, USA; 1Florida Alzheimer's Disease Research Center (ADRC), 
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(2)J. Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of 
Florida; Gainesville, FL, USA.
(3)Center for Advanced Technology and Education, Department of Electrical and 
Computer Engineering, Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA; 1Florida 
Alzheimer's Disease Research Center (ADRC), University of Florida, Gainesville, 
FL, USA.
(4)J. Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of 
Florida; Gainesville, FL, USA; Center for Cognitive Aging and Memory, McKnight 
Brain Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology; University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA; 
1Florida Alzheimer's Disease Research Center (ADRC), University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(6)Wein Center for Alzheimer's Disease and Memory Disorders, Mount Sinai Medical 
Center, Miami Beach, FL, USA; 1Florida Alzheimer's Disease Research Center 
(ADRC), University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(7)Department of Applied Physiology and Kinesiology, University of Florida; 
Gainesville, FL, USA; J. Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical 
Engineering, University of Florida; Gainesville, FL, USA; Department of 
Neurology; University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA; Center for Cognitive 
Aging and Memory, McKnight Brain Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, 
FL, USA; 1Florida Alzheimer's Disease Research Center (ADRC), University of 
Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. Electronic address: vcourt@ufl.edu.

Extracellular amyloid plaques in gray matter are the earliest pathological 
marker for Alzheimer's disease (AD), followed by abnormal tau protein 
accumulation. The link between diffusion changes in gray matter, amyloid and tau 
pathology, and cognitive decline is not well understood. We first performed 
cross-sectional analyses on T1-weighted imaging, diffusion MRI, and amyloid and 
tau PETs from the ADNI 2/3 database. We evaluated cortical volume, free-water, 
fractional anisotropy (FA), and amyloid and tau SUVRs in 171 cognitively normal, 
103 MCI, and 44 AD individuals. When the 3 groups were combined, increasing 
amyloid burden was associated with reduced extracellular free-water in the 
entorhinal cortex and hippocampus in those with amyloid-negative status whereas 
increasing tau burden was associated with increased extracellular free-water 
regardless of amyloid status. Next, we found that for the MCI subjects, 
diffusion measures (free-water, FA) alone predicted MMSE score 2 years later 
with a high r-square value (87%), as compared to tau SUVRs (27%), T1 volume 
(36%), and amyloid SUVRs (75%). Diffusion measures represent a potent 
non-invasive marker for predicting cognitive decline.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2022.10.013
PMID: 36455492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.


161. Aging Brain. 2024 Mar 21;5:100114. doi: 10.1016/j.nbas.2024.100114. eCollection 
2024.

Intrinsic functional connectivity strength of SuperAgers in the default mode and 
salience networks: Insights from ADNI.

Keenan HE(1), Czippel A(2), Heydari S(2), Gawryluk JR(2)(3)(4), Mazerolle 
EL(1)(5)(6); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, St. Francis Xavier University, 4130 University 
Avenue, Antigonish, NS B2G 2W5, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Victoria, 3800 Finnerty Road, 
Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, Canada.
(3)Institute on Aging and Lifelong Health, University of Victoria, 3800 Finnerty 
Road, Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, Canada.
(4)Division of Medical Sciences, University of Victoria, 3800 Finnerty Road, 
Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, Canada.
(5)Department of Computer Science, St. Francis Xavier University, 4130 
University Avenue, Antigonish, NS B2G 2W5, Canada.
(6)Department of Biology, St. Francis Xavier University, 4130 University Avenue, 
Antigonish, NS B2G 2W5, Canada.

There exists a group of older individuals who appear to be resistant to 
age-related memory decline. These "SuperAgers" have been shown to demonstrate 
preservation of cortical thickness and functional connectivity strength across 
the cortex which positively correlates with memory performance. Over the last 
decade, roughly 30 articles have been published regarding SuperAgers; however, 
to our knowledge, no replications of these studies have been published. The 
current study sought to conceptually replicate Zhang and colleagues' (2020) 
findings that SuperAgers demonstrate stronger intrinsic functional connectivity 
within the default mode (DMN) and salience networks (SN), and that connectivity 
strength within these networks correlates with memory performance. We identified 
20 SuperAgers and 20 matched Normal Agers in the control cohort of the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. We compared the 
functional connectivity strength of the DMN and SN between these groups, and 
used the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT) to evaluate correlations 
between functional connectivity and memory performance. Our results did not 
replicate Zhang and colleagues' (2020) results, as we found negligible 
differences between SuperAgers and Normal Agers in the DMN and SN, and no 
significant correlations between functional connectivity and memory performance 
after accounting for multiple comparisons. More replications are needed to 
confirm existing work. In addition, more research with larger SuperAger samples 
and more consistent definitions of SuperAging is needed, so that we can better 
understand this remarkable group of older adults.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbas.2024.100114
PMCID: PMC10973202
PMID: 38550790

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


162. Artif Intell Med. 2023 Jun;140:102543. doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2023.102543. Epub 
2023 Apr 7.

A unique color-coded visualization system with multimodal information fusion and 
deep learning in a longitudinal study of Alzheimer's disease.

Eslami M(1), Tabarestani S(2), Adjouadi M(3).

Author information:
(1)Harvard Ophthalmology AI lab, Schepens Eye Research Institute of 
Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Center for 
Advanced Technology and Education, Florida International University, Miami, FL, 
United States. Electronic address: Mohammad_eslami@meei.harvard.edu.
(2)Center for Advanced Technology and Education, Florida International 
University, Miami, FL, United States. Electronic address: Staba006@fiu.edu.
(3)Center for Advanced Technology and Education, Florida International 
University, Miami, FL, United States. Electronic address: adjouadi@fiu.edu.

PURPOSE: Automated diagnosis and prognosis of Alzheimer's Disease remain a 
challenging problem that machine learning (ML) techniques have attempted to 
resolve in the last decade. This study introduces a first-of-its-kind 
color-coded visualization mechanism driven by an integrated ML model to predict 
disease trajectory in a 2-year longitudinal study. The main aim of this study is 
to help capture visually in 2D and 3D renderings the diagnosis and prognosis of 
AD, therefore augmenting our understanding of the processes of multiclass 
classification and regression analysis.
METHOD: The proposed method, Machine Learning for Visualizing AD (ML4VisAD), is 
designed to predict disease progression through a visual output. This newly 
developed model takes baseline measurements as input to generate a color-coded 
visual image that reflects disease progression at different time points. The 
architecture of the network relies on convolutional neural networks. With 1123 
subjects selected from the ADNI QT-PAD dataset, we use a 10-fold 
cross-validation process to evaluate the method. Multimodal inputs* include 
neuroimaging data (MRI, PET), neuropsychological test scores (excluding MMSE, 
CDR-SB, and ADAS to avoid bias), cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers with 
measures of amyloid beta (ABETA), phosphorylated tau protein (PTAU), total tau 
protein (TAU), and risk factors that include age, gender, years of education, 
and ApoE4 gene.
FINDINGS/RESULTS: Based on subjective scores reached by three raters, the 
results showed an accuracy of 0.82 ± 0.03 for a 3-way classification and 
0.68 ± 0.05 for a 5-way classification. The visual renderings were generated in 
0.08 msec for a 23 × 23 output image and in 0.17 ms for a 45 × 45 output image. 
Through visualization, this study (1) demonstrates that the ML visual output 
augments the prospects for a more accurate diagnosis and (2) highlights why 
multiclass classification and regression analysis are incredibly challenging. An 
online survey was conducted to gauge this visualization platform's merits and 
obtain valuable feedback from users. All implementation codes are shared online 
on GitHub.
CONCLUSION: This approach makes it possible to visualize the many nuances that 
lead to a specific classification or prediction in the disease trajectory, all 
in context to multimodal measurements taken at baseline. This ML model can serve 
as a multiclass classification and prediction model while reinforcing the 
diagnosis and prognosis capabilities by including a visualization platform.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.artmed.2023.102543
PMCID: PMC10204620
PMID: 37210151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Malek Adjouadi, Mohammad Eslami, 
Solale Tabarestani reports financial support was provided by National Institutes 
of Health. Malek Adjouadi, Mohammad Eslami, Solale Tabarestani reports financial 
support was provided by National Science Foundation.


163. Sci Bull (Beijing). 2020 Jul 15;65(13):1103-1113. doi: 
10.1016/j.scib.2020.04.003. Epub 2020 Apr 3.

Independent and reproducible hippocampal radiomic biomarkers for multisite 
Alzheimer's disease: diagnosis, longitudinal progress and biological basis.

Zhao K(1), Ding Y(2), Han Y(3), Fan Y(4), Alexander-Bloch AF(5), Han T(6), Jin 
D(7), Liu B(8), Lu J(9), Song C(10), Wang P(11), Wang D(12), Wang Q(12), Xu 
K(13), Yang H(9), Yao H(14), Zheng Y(2), Yu C(15), Zhou B(16), Zhang X(17), Zhou 
Y(18), Jiang T(8), Zhang X(19), Liu Y(20); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative; Multi-Center Alzheimer Disease Imaging Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Brainnetome Center & National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of 
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China; School of 
Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, 
China; School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong Normal 
University, Ji'nan 250358, China.
(2)School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong Normal University, 
Ji'nan 250358, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University, 
Beijing 100053, China; Center of Alzheimer's Disease, Beijing Institute for 
Brain Disorders, Beijing 100069, China; Beijing Institute of Geriatrics, Beijing 
100053, China; National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disorders, 
Beijing 100053, China.
(4)Department of Radiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06511, USA.
(6)Department of Radiology, Tianjin Huanhu Hospital, Tianjin 300350, China.
(7)Brainnetome Center & National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of 
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China; School of 
Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100049, China.
(8)Brainnetome Center & National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of 
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China; School of 
Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100049, China; Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence 
Technology, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100190, China.
(9)Department of Radiology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University, 
Beijing 100053, China.
(10)Department of Neurology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Ji'nan 
250012, China.
(11)Department of Neurology, Tianjin Huanhu Hospital, Tianjin University, 
Tianjin 300350, China; Department of Neurology, The Secondary Medical Center, 
National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disease, Chinese PLA General 
Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.
(12)Department of Radiology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Ji'nan 
250012, China.
(13)Brainnetome Center & National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute 
of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.
(14)Department of Radiology, The Secondary Medical Center, National Clinical 
Research Center for Geriatric Disease, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 
100853, China.
(15)Department of Radiology, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, 
Tianjin 300052, China.
(16)Department of Neurology, The Secondary Medical Center, National Clinical 
Research Center for Geriatric Disease, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 
100853, China.
(17)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University, 
Beijing 100053, China.
(18)Department of Neurology, Tianjin Huanhu Hospital, Tianjin University, 
Tianjin 300350, China.
(19)Department of Neurology, The Secondary Medical Center, National Clinical 
Research Center for Geriatric Disease, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 
100853, China. Electronic address: zhangxi@301.hospital.com.cn.
(20)Brainnetome Center & National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute 
of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China; School of 
Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100049, China; Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence 
Technology, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100190, China. Electronic address: yliu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn.

Hippocampal morphological change is one of the main hallmarks of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). However, whether hippocampal radiomic features are robust as 
predictors of progression from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to AD dementia 
and whether these features provide any neurobiological foundation remains 
unclear. The primary aim of this study was to verify whether hippocampal 
radiomic features can serve as robust magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) markers 
for AD. Multivariate classifier-based support vector machine (SVM) analysis 
provided individual-level predictions for distinguishing AD patients (n = 261) 
from normal controls (NCs; n = 231) with an accuracy of 88.21% and intersite 
cross-validation. Further analyses of a large, independent the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset (n = 1228) reinforced these 
findings. In MCI groups, a systemic analysis demonstrated that the identified 
features were significantly associated with clinical features (e.g., 
apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype, polygenic risk scores, cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) Aβ, CSF Tau), and longitudinal changes in cognition ability; more 
importantly, the radiomic features had a consistently altered pattern with 
changes in the MMSE scores over 5 years of follow-up. These comprehensive 
results suggest that hippocampal radiomic features can serve as robust 
biomarkers for clinical application in AD/MCI, and further provide evidence for 
predicting whether an MCI subject would convert to AD based on the radiomics of 
the hippocampus. The results of this study are expected to have a substantial 
impact on the early diagnosis of AD/MCI.

Copyright © 2020 Science China Press. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scib.2020.04.003
PMID: 36659162

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


164. Neuroimage Clin. 2019;21:101637. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2018.101637. Epub 2018 Dec 
10.

Prognosis of conversion of mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's dementia by 
voxel-wise Cox regression based on FDG PET data.

Sörensen A(1), Blazhenets G(2), Rücker G(3), Schiller F(2), Meyer PT(2), Frings 
L(4); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, 
Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address: 
arnd.soerensen@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, 
Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Biometry and Statistics, Medical Center, University of 
Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, 
Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany; Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology 
Freiburg, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, 
Germany.

AIM: The value of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET for the prognosis of 
conversion from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to Alzheimer's dementia (AD) is 
controversial. In the present work, the identification of cerebral metabolic 
patterns with significant prognostic value for conversion of MCI patients to AD 
is investigated with voxel-based Cox regression, which in contrast to common 
categorical comparisons also utilizes time information.
METHODS: FDG PET data of 544 MCI patients from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database were randomly split into two 
equally-sized datasets (training and test). Within a median follow-up duration 
of 47 months (95% CI: 46-48 months) 181 patients developed AD. In the training 
dataset, voxel-wise Cox regressions were used to identify regions associated 
with conversion of MCI to AD. These were compared to regions identified by a 
classical group comparison (analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with statistical 
parametric mapping (SPM) 8) between converters and non-converters (both adjusted 
for apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype, mini-mental state examination (MMSE) 
score, age, sex and education). In the test dataset, normalized FDG uptake 
within significant brain regions from voxel-wise Cox- and ANCOVA analyses (Cox- 
and ANCOVA- regions of interest (ROI), respectively) and clinical variables APOE 
status, MMSE score and education were tested in different Cox models (adjusted 
for age, sex) including: (1) only clinical variables, (2) only normalized FDG 
uptake in ANCOVA-ROI, (3) only normalized FDG uptake from Cox-ROI, (4) clinical 
variables plus FDG uptake in ANCOVA-ROI, (5) clinical variables plus FDG uptake 
from Cox-ROI.
RESULTS: Conversion-related regions with relative hypometabolism comprised parts 
of the temporo-parietal and posterior cingulate cortex/precuneus for voxel-wise 
ANCOVA, plus frontal regions for voxel-wise Cox regression (both p < .01, false 
discovery rate (FDR) corrected). The clinical-only model (1) and the models 
based on normalized FDG uptake from Cox-ROI only (2) and ANCOVA-ROI only (3) all 
significantly predicted conversion to AD (Wald Test (WT): p < .001). The 
clinical model (1) was significantly improved by adding imaging information in 
model (4) (Akaike information criterion (AIC) relative likelihood (RL) (1) vs 
(4): RL < 0.018). There were no significant differences between models (2) and 
(3), as well as (4) and (5).
CONCLUSIONS: Voxel-wise Cox regression identifies conversion-related patterns of 
cerebral glucose metabolism, but is not superior to classical group contrasts in 
this regard. With imaging information from both FDG PET patterns, the prediction 
of conversion to AD was improved.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2018.101637
PMCID: PMC6411907
PMID: 30553760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Alzheimers Dis. 2023;92(3):941-957. doi: 10.3233/JAD-220806.

Can T1-Weighted Magnetic Resonance Imaging Significantly Improve Mini-Mental 
State Examination-Based Distinguishing Between Mild Cognitive Impairment and 
Early-Stage Alzheimer's Disease?

Marcisz A(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; Polanska J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Data Science and Engineering, The Silesian University of 
Technology, Gliwice, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Detecting early-stage Alzheimer's disease (AD) is still problematic 
in clinical practice. This work aimed to find T1-weighted MRI-based markers for 
AD and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to improve the screening process.
OBJECTIVE: Our assumption was to build a screening model that would be 
accessible and easy to use for physicians in their daily clinical routine.
METHODS: The multinomial logistic regression was used to detect status: AD, MCI, 
and normal control (NC) combined with the Bayesian information criterion for 
model selection. Several T1-weighted MRI-based radiomic features were considered 
explanatory variables in the prediction model.
RESULTS: The best radiomic predictor was the relative brain volume. The proposed 
method confirmed its quality by achieving a balanced accuracy of 95.18%, AUC of 
93.25%, NPV of 97.93%, and PPV of 90.48% for classifying AD versus NC for the 
European DTI Study on Dementia (EDSD). The comparison of the two models: with 
the MMSE score only as an independent variable and corrected for the relative 
brain value and age, shows that the addition of the T1-weighted MRI-based 
biomarker improves the quality of MCI detection (AUC: 67.04% versus 71.08%) 
while maintaining quality for AD (AUC: 93.35% versus 93.25%). Additionally, 
among MCI patients predicted as AD inconsistently with the original diagnosis, 
60% from ADNI and 76.47% from EDSD were re-diagnosed as AD within a 48-month 
follow-up. It shows that our model can detect AD patients a few years earlier 
than a standard medical diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: The created method is non-invasive, inexpensive, clinically 
accessible, and efficiently supports AD/MCI screening.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-220806
PMCID: PMC10116132
PMID: 36806505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
report.


166. J Alzheimers Dis Rep. 2020 Feb 28;4(1):49-59. doi: 10.3233/ADR-190149.

Identification of Superficial White Matter Abnormalities in Alzheimer's Disease 
and Mild Cognitive Impairment Using Diffusion Tensor Imaging.

Bigham B(1), Zamanpour SA(1), Zemorshidi F(2), Boroumand F(3), Zare H(1)(4); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Physics, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad University of 
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(2)Department of Neurology, Ghaem Hospital, Mashhad University of Medical 
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(3)Student Research Committee, Social Determinants of Health Research Center, 
Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(4)Medical Physics Research Center, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, 
Mashhad, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) estimates the microstructural 
alterations of the brain, as a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-based 
neuroimaging technique. Prior DTI studies reported decreased structural 
integrity of the superficial white matter (SWM) in the brain diseases.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to determine the diffusion characteristics of SWM in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) using tractography 
and region of interest (ROI) approaches.
METHODS: The diffusion MRI data were downloaded from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database on 24 patients with AD, 24 with MCI, and 
24 normal control (NC) subjects. DTI processing was performed using DSI Studio 
software. First, for ROI-based analysis, The superficial white matter was 
divided into right and left frontal, parietal, temporal, insula, limbic and 
occipital regions by the Talairach Atlas, Then, for tractography-based analysis, 
the tractography of each of these regions was performed with 100000 seeds. 
Finally, the average diffusion values were extracted from voxels within the ROIs 
and tracts.
RESULTS: Both tractography and ROI analyses showed a significant difference in 
radial, axial and mean diffusivity values between the three groups (p < 0.05) 
across most of the SWM. Furthermore, The Mini-Mental State Examination was 
significantly correlated with radial, axial, and mean diffusivity values in 
parietal and temporal lobes SWM in the AD group (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: DTI provided information indicating microstructural changes in the 
SWM of patients with AD and MCI. Therefore, assessment of the SWM using DTI may 
be helpful for the clinical diagnosis of patients with AD and MCI.

© 2020 – IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3233/ADR-190149
PMCID: PMC7081087
PMID: 32206757

Conflict of interest statement: The authors disclose no conflicts of interest.


167. Behav Neurol. 2017;2017:1850909. doi: 10.1155/2017/1850909. Epub 2017 Jan 31.

Optimizing Neuropsychological Assessments for Cognitive, Behavioral, and 
Functional Impairment Classification: A Machine Learning Study.

Battista P(1), Salvatore C(1), Castiglioni I(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Bioimaging and Physiology, National Research Council 
(IBFM-CNR), Segrate, Milano, Italy.

Subjects with Alzheimer's disease (AD) show loss of cognitive functions and 
change in behavioral and functional state affecting the quality of their daily 
life and that of their families and caregivers. A neuropsychological assessment 
plays a crucial role in detecting such changes from normal conditions. However, 
despite the existence of clinical measures that are used to classify and 
diagnose AD, a large amount of subjectivity continues to exist. Our aim was to 
assess the potential of machine learning in quantifying this process and 
optimizing or even reducing the amount of neuropsychological tests used to 
classify AD patients, also at an early stage of impairment. We investigated the 
role of twelve state-of-the-art neuropsychological tests in the automatic 
classification of subjects with none, mild, or severe impairment as measured by 
the clinical dementia rating (CDR). Data were obtained from the ADNI database. 
In the groups of measures used as features, we included measures of both 
cognitive domains and subdomains. Our findings show that some tests are more 
frequently best predictors for the automatic classification, namely, LM, 
ADAS-Cog, AVLT, and FAQ, with a major role of the ADAS-Cog measures of delayed 
and immediate memory and the FAQ measure of financial competency.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/1850909
PMCID: PMC5307249
PMID: 28255200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests regarding the publication of this paper.


168. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2023;10(2):251-258. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2023.17.

Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Comparison of Tau Imaging with 18F-MK6240 and 
18F-Flortaucipir in Populations Matched for Age, MMSE and Brain Beta-Amyloid 
Burden.

Bourgeat P(1), Krishnadas N, Doré V, Mulligan R, Tyrrell R, Bozinovski S, Huang 
K, Fripp J, Villemagne VL, Rowe CC.

Author information:
(1)Pierrick Bourgeat, The Australian e-Health Research Centre, CSIRO, Level 7, 
296 Herston Road, Herston Qld 4029, Australia, Tel: 07 3253 3659, 
Pierrick.bourgeat@csiro.au.

OBJECTIVES: Longitudinal tau quantification may provide a useful marker of drug 
efficacy in clinical trials. Different tau PET tracers may have different 
sensitivity to longitudinal changes, but without a head-to-head dataset or a 
carefully designed case-matching procedure, comparing results in different 
cohorts can be biased. In this study, we compared the tau PET tracers, 
18F-MK6240 and 18F-flortaucipir (FTP), both cross-sectionally and longitudinally 
by case-matching subjects in the AIBL and ADNI longitudinal cohort studies.
METHODS: A subset of 113 participants from AIBL and 113 from ADNI imaged using 
18F-MK6240 and 18F-FTP respectively, with baseline and follow-up, were matched 
based on baseline clinical diagnosis, MMSE, age and amyloid (Aβ) PET centiloid 
value. Subjects were grouped as 64 Aβ- cognitively unimpaired (CU), 22 Aβ+ CU, 
14 Aβ+ mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and 13 Aβ+ Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
Tracer retention was measured in the mesial, temporoparietal, rest of the 
cortex, and a meta-temporal region composed of entorhinal, inferior/middle 
temporal, fusiform, parahippocampus and amygdala. T-tests were employed to 
assess group separation at baseline using SUVR Z-scores and longitudinally using 
SUVR%/Yr.
RESULTS: Both tracers detected statistically significant differences at baseline 
in most regions between all clinical groups. Only 18F-MK6240 showed 
statistically significant higher rate of SUVR increase in Aβ+ CU compared to Aβ- 
CU in the mesial, meta-temporal and temporoparietal regions.
CONCLUSION: 18F-MK6240 appears to be a more sensitive tracer for change in tau 
level at the preclinical stage of AD.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2023.17
PMID: 36946452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Christopher C. Rowe has received research grants 
from NHMRC, Enigma Australia, Biogen, Eisai, and Abbvie. He is on the scientific 
advisory board for Cerveau Technologies and consulted for Prothena, Eisai, 
Roche, and Biogen Australia. Victor Villemagne is and has been a consultant or 
paid speaker at sponsored conference sessions for Eli Lilly, Life Molecular 
Imaging, GE Healthcare, Abbvie, Lundbeck, Shanghai Green Valley Pharmaceutical 
Co Ltd, and Hoffmann La Roche. The other authors did not report any conflict of 
interest.


169. Neuroimage. 2022 Nov 15;262:119527. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.119527. Epub 
2022 Jul 30.

β-amyloid PET harmonisation across longitudinal studies: Application to AIBL, 
ADNI and OASIS3.

Bourgeat P(1), Doré V(2), Burnham SC(3), Benzinger T(4), Tosun D(5), Li S(3), 
Goyal M(6), LaMontagne P(6), Jin L(7), Rowe CC(8), Weiner MW(5), Morris JC(9), 
Masters CL(7), Fripp J(3), Villemagne VL(10); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative, OASIS3, and the AIBL research group.

Author information:
(1)CSIRO Health and Biosecurity, Brisbane, Australia. Electronic address: 
Pierrick.bourgeat@csiro.au.
(2)CSIRO Health and Biosecurity, Brisbane, Australia; Department of Molecular 
Imaging & Therapy, Austin Health, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)CSIRO Health and Biosecurity, Brisbane, Australia.
(4)Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(5)San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA,; 
Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(6)Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, USA.
(7)The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Melbourne, Australia.
(8)Department of Molecular Imaging & Therapy, Austin Health, Melbourne, 
Australia; The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Melbourne, Australia.
(9)Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(10)Department of Molecular Imaging & Therapy, Austin Health, Melbourne, 
Australia; Department of Psychiatry, The University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The Centiloid scale was developed to harmonise the quantification 
of β-amyloid (Aβ) PET images across tracers, scanners, and processing pipelines. 
However, several groups have reported differences across tracers and scanners 
even after centiloid conversion. In this study, we aim to evaluate the impact of 
different pre and post-processing harmonisation steps on the robustness of 
longitudinal Centiloid data across three large international cohort studies.
METHODS: All Aβ PET data in AIBL (N = 3315), ADNI (N = 3442) and OASIS3 
(N = 1398) were quantified using the MRI-based Centiloid standard SPM pipeline 
and the PET-only pipeline CapAIBL. SUVR were converted into Centiloids using 
each tracer's respective transform. Global Aβ burden from pre-defined target 
cortical regions in Centiloid units were quantified for both raw PET scans and 
PET scans smoothed to a uniform 8 mm full width half maximum (FWHM) effective 
smoothness. For Florbetapir, we assessed the performance of using both the 
standard Whole Cerebellum (WCb) and a composite white matter (WM)+WCb reference 
region. Additionally, our recently proposed quantification based on Non-negative 
Matrix Factorisation (NMF) was applied to all spatially and SUVR normalised 
images. Correlation with clinical severity measured by the Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) and effect size, as well as tracer agreement in 
11C-PiB-18F-Florbetapir pairs and longitudinal consistency were evaluated.
RESULTS: The smoothing to a uniform resolution partially reduced longitudinal 
variability, but did not improve inter-tracer agreement, effect size or 
correlation with MMSE. Using a Composite reference region for 18F-Florbetapir 
improved inter-tracer agreement, effect size, correlation with MMSE, and 
longitudinal consistency. The best results were however obtained when using the 
NMF method which outperformed all other quantification approaches in all metrics 
used.
CONCLUSIONS: FWHM smoothing has limited impact on longitudinal consistency or 
outliers. A Composite reference region including subcortical WM should be used 
for computing both cross-sectional and longitudinal Florbetapir Centiloid. NMF 
improves Centiloid quantification on all metrics examined.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.119527
PMCID: PMC9550562
PMID: 35917917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Med Signals Sens. 2021 May 24;11(2):120-130. doi: 10.4103/jmss.JMSS_11_20. 
eCollection 2021 Apr-Jun.

Early Detection of Alzheimer's Disease Based on Clinical Trials, 
Three-Dimensional Imaging Data, and Personal Information Using Autoencoders.

Akramifard H(1), Balafar MA(1), Razavi SN(1), Ramli AR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Software Engineering, Faculty of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering, University of Tabriz, East Azerbaijan, Tabriz, Iran.
(2)Department of Software Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, University Putra 
Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: A timely diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is crucial to obtain 
more practical treatments. In this article, a novel approach using Auto-Encoder 
Neural Networks (AENN) for early detection of AD was proposed.
METHOD: The proposed method mainly deals with the classification of multimodal 
data and the imputation of missing data. The data under study involve the 
MiniMental State Examination, magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission 
tomography, cerebrospinal fluid data, and personal information. Natural 
logarithm was used for normalizing the data. The Auto-Encoder Neural Networks 
was used for imputing missing data. Principal component analysis algorithm was 
used for reducing dimensionality of data. Support Vector Machine (SVM) was used 
as classifier. The proposed method was evaluated using Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. Then, 10fold crossvalidation was used 
to audit the detection accuracy of the method.
RESULTS: The effectiveness of the proposed approach was studied under several 
scenarios considering 705 cases of ADNI database. In three binary classification 
problems, that is AD vs. normal controls (NCs), mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
vs. NC, and MCI vs. AD, we obtained the accuracies of 95.57%, 83.01%, and 
78.67%, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Experimental results revealed that the proposed method significantly 
outperformed most of the stateoftheart methods.

Copyright: © 2021 Journal of Medical Signals & Sensors.

DOI: 10.4103/jmss.JMSS_11_20
PMCID: PMC8253314
PMID: 34268100

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


171. Neurol Lett. 2023 Apr;2(1):35-41. doi: 10.52547/nl.2.1.35. Epub 2022 Apr 15.

COVID-19 vaccine-hesitancy is associated with lower cortical volume in elderly 
individuals.

Nabizadeh F(1)(2); Alzheimer’s disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Group (NRG), Universal Scientific Education and 
Research Network (USERN), Tehran, Iran.
(2)School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: According to a large number of scientific reports, the main problem 
is COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy which slowed down the vaccination program. 
Previous studies revealed that COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy is associated with 
lower cognitive performance. However, the neurobiology of such behavior is less 
known, and investigating the brain structural patterns in this regard can extend 
our knowledge on the basis of this behavior. This study aimed to investigate the 
link between brain structural features including cortical and subcortical volume 
with COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy in elderly individuals.
METHODS: A total of 221 healthy subjects without any cognitive impairment with a 
mean age of 63.7 ± 6.1 were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) database. Overall, 87 vaccine-hesitant (VH) and 134 
vaccine-accepted (VA) were entered into this study. The difference in the volume 
of cortical and subcortical regions was investigated between VH and VA groups.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference in cognitive status measured by 
MMSE, MoCA, ADAS-cog, and RAVLT between VA and VH groups (P>0.05). The analysis 
showed that VA subjects had significantly higher left pars orbitalis (P: 0.013), 
left precentral (P: 0.042), right caudal anterior cingulate (P: 0.044), and 
right isthmus cingulate (P: 0.013) volume compared to the VH group. There was no 
significant difference in other cortical and subcortical regions.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, this finding demonstrated that in the era of 
complicated decision-making due to social media reports, elderly adults with 
smaller frontal and cingulate regions are more likely to be vaccine-hesitant. 
These findings can highlight the link between cortical regions and 
health-protective behaviors such as taking up the offer of vaccination.

DOI: 10.52547/nl.2.1.35
PMCID: PMC10847881
PMID: 38327486

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The author declares no 
conflict of interest regarding the publication of this paper.


172. Int J Alzheimers Dis. 2023 Feb 6;2023:5336273. doi: 10.1155/2023/5336273. 
eCollection 2023.

CSF-Targeted Proteomics Indicate Amyloid-Beta Ratios in Patients with 
Alzheimer's Dementia Spectrum.

Behzad M(1)(2), Zirak N(1)(3), Madani GH(1)(4), Baidoo L(1), Rezaei A(1), 
Karbasi S(1)(5), Sadeghi M(1), Shafie M(1)(6), Mayeli M(1)(6), Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative(7).

Author information:
(1)NeuroTRACT Association, Students' Scientific Research Center, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Chemistery, University of Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Educational Science and Psychology, University of Tabriz, 
Tabriz, Iran.
(4)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Guilan, Iran.
(5)Department of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, 
Iran.
(6)School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, USA.

BACKGROUND: According to recent studies, amyloid-β (Aβ) isoforms as 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers have remarkable predictive value for 
cognitive decline in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Herein, we 
aimed to investigate the correlations between several targeted proteomics in CSF 
samples with Aβ ratios and cognitive scores in patients in AD spectrum to search 
for potential early diagnostic utility.
METHODS: A total of 719 participants were found eligible for inclusion. Patients 
were then categorized into cognitively normal (CN), mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI), and AD and underwent an assessment of Aβ and proteomics. Clinical 
Dementia Rating (CDR), Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS), and Mini 
Mental State Exam (MMSE) were used for further cognitive assessment. The Aβ42, 
Aβ42/Aβ40, and Aβ42/38 ratios were considered as means of comparison to identify 
those peptides corresponding significantly to these established biomarkers and 
cognitive scores. The diagnostic utility of the IASNTQSR, VAELEDEK, VVSSIEQK, 
GDSVVYGLR, EPVAGDAVPGPK, and QETLPSK was assessed.
RESULTS: All investigated peptides corresponded significantly to Aβ42 in 
controls. In those with MCI, VAELEDEK and EPVAGDAVPGPK were significantly 
correlated with Aβ42 (p value < 0.001). Additionally, IASNTQSR, VVSSIEQK, 
GDSVVYGLR, and QETLPSK were significantly correlated with Aβ42/Aβ40 and Aβ42/38 
(p value < 0.001) in this group. This group of peptides similarly corresponded 
to Aβ ratios in those with AD. Eventually, IASNTQSR, VAELEDEK, and VVSSIEQK were 
significantly associated with CDR, ADAS-11, and ADAS-13, particularly in MCI 
group.
CONCLUSION: Our research suggests potential early diagnostic and prognostic 
utilities for certain peptides extracted from CSF-targeted proteomics research. 
The ethical approval of ADNI is available at ClinicalTrials.gov with Identifier: 
NCT00106899.

Copyright © 2023 Maryam Behzad et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2023/5336273
PMCID: PMC9925239
PMID: 36793451

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.


173. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2022 Feb 22;14(1):36. doi: 10.1186/s13195-022-00973-1.

Relationship of sex differences in cortical thickness and memory among 
cognitively healthy subjects and individuals with mild cognitive impairment and 
Alzheimer disease.

Cieri F(#)(1), Zhuang X(#)(1)(2), Cordes D(1)(3), Kaplan N(1), Cummings J(4), 
Caldwell J(5); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Las Vegas, NV, USA.
(2)Interdisciplinary Neuroscience Program, University of Nevada Las Vegas 
(UNLV), Las Vegas, NV, USA.
(3)University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA.
(4)Chambers-Grundy Center for Transformative Neuroscience, Department of Brain 
Health, School of Integrated Health Sciences, University of Nevada Las Vegas 
(UNLV), Las Vegas, NV, USA.
(5)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Las Vegas, NV, USA. 
caldwej5@ccf.org.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: An aging society has increased rates of late onset Alzheimer disease 
dementia (ADD), the most common form of age-related dementia. This 
neurodegenerative disease disproportionately affects women.
METHODS: We use data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
to examine sex differences in cortical thickness (CT) and memory performance. 
Analyses of covariance (ANCOVA) models were used to examine effects of sex and 
diagnosis (DX) on CT and verbal memory. For regions demonstrating significant 
interaction effects of sex and DX, we tested whether sex moderated 
cognition-thickness relationships. We used machine learning as a complementary 
method to explore multivariate CT differences between women and men.
RESULTS: Women demonstrated greater CT in many brain regions. More specifically, 
men showed relatively consistent CT declines in all stages, from normal control 
(NC) to ADD in the bilateral cingulate cortex, bilateral temporal regions, and 
left precuneus; women had more stable CT in these regions between NC and mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) stages, but sharper declines from MCI to ADD. 
Similarly, for the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT), ANCOVA analyses 
showed that women had significantly better immediate and delayed recall scores 
than men, at NC and MCI stages, but greater differences, cross-sectionally, from 
MCI to ADD than men. We found significant sex moderation effects between 
RAVLT-immediate scores and CT of right isthmus-cingulate for all subjects across 
DX. Partial correlation analyses revealed that increased CT of right 
isthmus-cingulate was associated with better verbal learning in women, driven by 
positron emission tomography defined amyloid positive (Aβ+) subjects. 
Significant sex-moderation effects in cognition-thickness relationships were 
further found in the right middle-temporal, left precuneus, and left superior 
temporal regions in Aβ+ subjects. Using a machine learning approach, we 
investigated multivariate CT differences between women and men, showing an 
accuracy in classification of 75% for Aβ+ cognitively NC participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Sex differences in memory and CT can play a key role in the 
different vulnerability and progression of ADD in women compared to men. Machine 
learning indicates sex differences in CT are most relevant early in the ADD 
neurodegeneration.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-022-00973-1
PMCID: PMC8864917
PMID: 35193682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


174. J Neurosci Methods. 2018 May 15;302:75-81. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2018.03.008. 
Epub 2018 Mar 22.

An ensemble learning system for a 4-way classification of Alzheimer's disease 
and mild cognitive impairment.

Yao D(1), Calhoun VD(2), Fu Z(3), Du Y(4), Sui J(5).

Author information:
(1)Brainnetome Center and NLPR, Institute of Automation, CAS, Beijing, China; 
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)The Mind Research Network, NM, USA; Dept. of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, 
University of New Mexico, NM, USA; Department of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering, University of New Mexico, NM, USA.
(3)The Mind Research Network, NM, USA.
(4)The Mind Research Network, NM, USA; Shanxi University, School of Computer & 
Information Technology, Taiyuan, China.
(5)Brainnetome Center and NLPR, Institute of Automation, CAS, Beijing, China; 
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China; CAS Center for 
Excellence in Brain Science, Institute of Automation, Beijing, China. Electronic 
address: kittysj@gmail.com.

Discriminating Alzheimer's disease (AD) from its prodromal form, mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), is a significant clinical problem that may facilitate early 
diagnosis and intervention, in which a more challenging issue is to classify MCI 
subtypes, i.e., those who eventually convert to AD (cMCI) versus those who do 
not (MCI). To solve this difficult 4-way classification problem (AD, MCI, cMCI 
and healthy controls), a competition was hosted by Kaggle to invite the 
scientific community to apply their machine learning approaches on pre-processed 
sets of T1-weighted magnetic resonance images (MRI) data and the demographic 
information from the international Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative 
(ADNI) database. This paper summarizes our competition results. We first 
proposed a hierarchical process by turning the 4-way classification into five 
binary classification problems. A new feature selection technology based on 
relative importance was also proposed, aiming to identify a more informative and 
concise subset from 426 sMRI morphometric and 3 demographic features, to ensure 
each binary classifier to achieve its highest accuracy. As a result, about 2% of 
the original features were selected to build a new feature space, which can 
achieve the final four-way classification with a 54.38% accuracy on testing data 
through hierarchical grouping, higher than several alternative methods in 
comparison. More importantly, the selected discriminative features such as 
hippocampal volume, parahippocampal surface area, and medial orbitofrontal 
thickness, etc. as well as the MMSE score, are reasonable and consistent with 
those reported in AD/MCI deficits. In summary, the proposed method provides a 
new framework for multi-way classification using hierarchical grouping and 
precise feature selection.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2018.03.008
PMCID: PMC7368970
PMID: 29578038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Front Aging Neurosci. 2023 Feb 23;14:943566. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.943566. 
eCollection 2022.

Patterns of structure-function association in normal aging and in Alzheimer's 
disease: Screening for mild cognitive impairment and dementia with ML regression 
and classification models.

Statsenko Y(1)(2), Meribout S(3), Habuza T(2)(4), Almansoori TM(1), Gorkom 
KN(1), Gelovani JG(1)(5)(6)(7), Ljubisavljevic M(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab 
Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(2)Big Data Analytics Center (BIDAC), United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, 
United Arab Emirates.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Constantine 3, Constantine, Algeria.
(4)College of Information Technology, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, 
United Arab Emirates.
(5)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab 
Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(6)Biomedical Engineering Department, College of Engineering, Wayne State 
University, Detroit, MI, United States.
(7)Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Salaya, Thailand.
(8)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United 
Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(9)Abu Dhabi Precision Medicine Virtual Research Institute (ADPMVRI), United 
Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.

BACKGROUND: The combined analysis of imaging and functional modalities is 
supposed to improve diagnostics of neurodegenerative diseases with advanced data 
science techniques.
OBJECTIVE: To get an insight into normal and accelerated brain aging by 
developing the machine learning models that predict individual performance in 
neuropsychological and cognitive tests from brain MRI. With these models we 
endeavor to look for patterns of brain structure-function association (SFA) 
indicative of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's dementia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We explored the age-related variability of cognitive and 
neuropsychological test scores in normal and accelerated aging and constructed 
regression models predicting functional performance in cognitive tests from 
brain radiomics data. The models were trained on the three study cohorts from 
ADNI dataset-cognitively normal individuals, patients with MCI or 
dementia-separately. We also looked for significant correlations between 
cortical parcellation volumes and test scores in the cohorts to investigate 
neuroanatomical differences in relation to cognitive status. Finally, we worked 
out an approach for the classification of the examinees according to the pattern 
of structure-function associations into the cohorts of the cognitively normal 
elderly and patients with MCI or dementia.
RESULTS: In the healthy population, the global cognitive functioning slightly 
changes with age. It also remains stable across the disease course in the 
majority of cases. In healthy adults and patients with MCI or dementia, the 
trendlines of performance in digit symbol substitution test and trail making 
test converge at the approximated point of 100 years of age. According to the 
SFA pattern, we distinguish three cohorts: the cognitively normal elderly, 
patients with MCI, and dementia. The highest accuracy is achieved with the model 
trained to predict the mini-mental state examination score from voxel-based 
morphometry data. The application of the majority voting technique to models 
predicting results in cognitive tests improved the classification performance up 
to 91.95% true positive rate for healthy participants, 86.21%-for MCI and 
80.18%-for dementia cases.
CONCLUSION: The machine learning model, when trained on the cases of this of 
that group, describes a disease-specific SFA pattern. The pattern serves as a 
"stamp" of the disease reflected by the model.

Copyright © 2023 Statsenko, Meribout, Habuza, Almansoori, Gorkom, Gelovani and 
Ljubisavljevic.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.943566
PMCID: PMC9995946
PMID: 36910862

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


176. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Nov 15:2024.11.13.24317270. doi: 
10.1101/2024.11.13.24317270.

CSF inflammatory cytokines as prognostic indicators for cognitive decline across 
Alzheimer's disease spectrum.

Ghanbarian E(1), Khorsand B(1), Petersen KK(2), Nallapu BT(3), Sajjadi SA(1), 
Lipton RB(3), Ezzati A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, 
USA.
(3)Saul B. Korey Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
New York City, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: A growing body of evidence suggests that neuroinflammation 
contributes actively to pathophysiology of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and promotes 
AD progression. The predictive value of neuroinflammatory biomarkers for 
disease-staging or estimating disease progression is not well understood. In 
this study, we investigate the diagnostic and prognostic utility of inflammatory 
biomarkers in combination with conventional AD biomarkers.
METHODS: We included 258 participants from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) who had CSF biomarkers of β-Amyloid (Aβ), tau, and 
inflammation. The primary outcome of interest was clinically meaningful 
cognitive decline (CMCD) as defined by an increase of ≥4 on the Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale Cognitive Subscore 11 (ADAS-11, scores 0-70, higher 
scores indicate worse cognition). Predictor variables were categorized as 
demographics (D; age, sex, and education), genetic (APOE4 status (A)), 
inflammatory biomarkers (I), and classic (C) cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
biomarkers of Aβ and p-tau181. Simultaneous inclusion of eleven CSF inflammatory 
biomarkers as covariates in logistic regression models was examined to assess 
improvements in classifying baseline clinical diagnoses (cognitively normal 
(CN), mild cognitive impairment (MCI), Dementia) and predicting individuals with 
and without CMCD over one year of follow-up.
RESULTS: At 1-year follow up, 27.1% of participants experienced CMCD. Inclusion 
of inflammatory biomarkers improved baseline classification of CN vs MCI as well 
as CN vs Dementia for models including D and A variables (DA; both p<0.001). 
Similarly, when classic CSF biomarkers of AD were included into the model (DAC 
model), inclusion of inflammatory markers improved classification of CN vs MCI 
(p<0.01) as well as CN vs Dementia (p<0.001). Addition of inflammatory 
biomarkers to both DA and DAC models improved predictive performance for CMCD in 
persons with baseline MCI and Dementia (all p<0.05), but not in the CN group. In 
addition, the predictive performance of the DAI model was superior to the DAC 
model in the MCI and Dementia groups (both p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Addition of CSF inflammatory biomarkers to CSF biomarkers of AD can 
improve diagnostic accuracy of clinical disease stage at baseline and add 
incremental value to AD biomarkers for prediction of cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.11.13.24317270
PMCID: PMC11601771
PMID: 39606412


177. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021 Jul 14;13:672077. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.672077. 
eCollection 2021.

Association of Tau Pathology With Clinical Symptoms in the Subfields of 
Hippocampal Formation.

Ge X(1)(2)(3), Zhang D(2), Qiao Y(2), Zhang J(2), Xu J(4), Zheng Y(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong Normal University, 
Jinan, China.
(2)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging (LONI), USC Stevens Neuroimaging and Informatics 
Institute, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, United States.
(3)School of Medical Imaging, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, China.
(4)College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin Key Lab of Cognitive Computing 
and Application, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.

Objective: To delineate the relationship between clinical symptoms and tauopathy 
of the hippocampal subfields under different amyloid statuses. Methods: One 
hundred and forty-three subjects were obtained from the ADNI project, including 
87 individuals with normal cognition, 46 with mild cognitive impairment, and 10 
with Alzheimer's disease (AD). All subjects underwent the tau PET, amyloid PET, 
T1W, and high-resolution T2W scans. Clinical symptoms were assessed by the 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) total score and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale cognition 13 (ADAS-cog-13) total score, comprising memory and executive 
function scores. The hippocampal subfields including Cornu Ammonis (CA1-3), 
subiculum (Sub), and dentate gyrus (DG), as well as the adjacent 
para-hippocampus (PHC) and entorhinal cortex (ERC), were segmented automatically 
using the Automatic Segmentation of Hippocampal Subfields (ASHS) software. The 
relationship between tauopathy/volume of the hippocampal subfields and 
assessment scores was calculated using partial correlation analysis under 
different amyloid status, by controlling age, gender, education, apolipoprotein 
E (APOE) allele ɛ4 carrier status, and, time interval between the acquisition 
time of tau PET and amyloid PET scans. Results: Compared with amyloid negative 
(A-) group, individuals from amyloid positive (A+) group are more impaired based 
on the Mini-mental State Examination (MMSE; p = 3.82e-05), memory (p = 
6.30e-04), executive function (p = 0.0016), and ADAS-cog-13 scores (p = 
5.11e-04). Significant decrease of volume (CA1, DG, and Sub) and increase of tau 
deposition (CA1, Sub, ERC, and PHC) of the hippocampal subfields of both 
hemispheres were observed for the A+ group compared to the A- group. Tauopathy 
of ERC is significantly associated with memory score for the A- group, and the 
associated regions spread into Sub and PHC for the A+ group. The relationship 
between the impairment of behavior or executive function and tauopathy of the 
hippocampal subfield was discovered within the A+ group. Leftward asymmetry was 
observed with the association between assessment scores and tauopathy of the 
hippocampal subfield, which is more prominent for the NPI score for the A+ 
group. Conclusion: The associations of tauopathy/volume of the hippocampal 
subfields with clinical symptoms provide additional insight into the 
understanding of local changes of the human HF during the AD continuum and can 
be used as a reference for future studies.

Copyright © 2021 Ge, Zhang, Qiao, Zhang, Xu and Zheng.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.672077
PMCID: PMC8317580
PMID: 34335226

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


178. Diagnostics (Basel). 2023 Nov 2;13(21):3375. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics13213375.

Prediction of Conversion from Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer's Disease 
Using Amyloid PET and Brain MR Imaging Data: A 48-Month Follow-Up Analysis of 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative Cohort.

Kim DH(1)(2), Oh M(1), Kim JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan 
College of Medicine, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Daejeon Eulji Medical Center, Eulji 
University School of Medicine, Daejeon 35233, Republic of Korea.

We developed a novel quantification method named "shape feature" by combining 
the features of amyloid positron emission tomography (PET) and brain magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) and evaluated its significance in predicting the 
conversion from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to Alzheimer's disease (AD) in 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort. From the ADNI 
database, 334 patients with MCI were included. The brain amyloid smoothing score 
(AV45_BASS) and brain atrophy index (MR_BAI) were calculated using the surface 
area and volume of the region of interest in AV45 PET and MRI. During the 
48-month follow-up period, 108 (32.3%) patients converted from MCI to AD. Age, 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), cognitive subscale of the Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS-cog), apolipoprotein E (APOE), standardized 
uptake value ratio (SUVR), AV45_BASS, MR_BAI, and shape feature were 
significantly different between converters and non-converters. Univariate 
analysis showed that age, MMSE, ADAS-cog, APOE, SUVR, AV45_BASS, MR_BAI, and 
shape feature were correlated with the conversion to AD. In multivariate 
analyses, high shape feature, SUVR, and ADAS-cog values were associated with an 
increased risk of conversion to AD. In patients with MCI in the ADNI cohort, our 
quantification method was the strongest prognostic factor for predicting their 
conversion to AD.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics13213375
PMCID: PMC10650660
PMID: 37958271

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


179. Psychol Aging. 2013 Mar;28(1):191-201. doi: 10.1037/a0031063.

Subgroup of ADNI normal controls characterized by atrophy and cognitive decline 
associated with vascular damage.

Nettiksimmons J(1), Beckett L, Schwarz C, Carmichael O, Fletcher E, Decarli C.

Author information:
(1)Clinical and Translational Science Center, University of California, Davis, 
School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA. janettik@ucdavis.edu

Previous work examining Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
normal controls using cluster analysis identified a subgroup characterized by 
substantial brain atrophy and white matter hyperintensities (WMH). We 
hypothesized that these effects could be related to vascular damage. Fifty-three 
individuals in the suspected vascular cluster (Normal 2) were compared with 31 
individuals from the cluster characterized as healthy/typical (Normal 1) on a 
variety of outcomes, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers, vascular risk factors and outcomes, 
cognitive trajectory, and medications for vascular conditions. Normal 2 was 
significantly older but did not differ on ApoE4+ prevalence. Normal 2 differed 
significantly from Normal 1 on all MRI measures but not on Amyloid-Beta1-42 or 
total tau protein. Normal 2 had significantly higher body mass index (BMI), 
Hachinksi score, and creatinine levels, and took significantly more medications 
for vascular conditions. Normal 2 had marginally significantly higher 
triglycerides and blood glucose. Normal 2 had a worse cognitive trajectory on 
the Rey's Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT) 30-min delay test and the 
Functional Activity Questionnaire (FAQ). Cerebral atrophy associated with 
multiple vascular risks is common among cognitively normal individuals, forming 
a distinct subgroup with significantly increased cognitive decline. Further 
studies are needed to determine the clinical impact of these findings.

DOI: 10.1037/a0031063
PMCID: PMC3751169
PMID: 23527743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Chonnam Med J. 2024 Jan;60(1):51-58. doi: 10.4068/cmj.2024.60.1.51. Epub 2024 
Jan 25.

ATN Classification and Clinical Progression of the Amyloid-Negative Group in 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative Participants.

Cho SH(1), Kim S(1), Choi SM(1), Kim BC(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Chonnam National University Hospital, Chonnam 
National University Medical School, Gwangju, Korea.

Alzheimer's disease has recently been classified using three biological markers 
(amyloid [A], tau [T], and neurodegeneration [N]) to help elucidate its 
progression. We aimed to investigate whether there were differences between 
cognitive function and the clinical dementia symptoms over time relative to the 
ATN classification in the amyloid-negative group. In the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort, 310 participants who underwent all the 
tests required for ATN classification were enrolled. The cognitive function 
score differences (Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale 13 
[ADAS-Cog 13], Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes [CDR-SOB], and Mini-Mental 
State Examination [MMSE]) between the groups were analyzed using the analysis of 
covariance and score changes over time with a linear mixed-effects model. In the 
cross-sectional analysis, ADAS-Cog 13 scores were higher for A-T-N+ and A-T+N+ 
than for A-T-N- (p<0.001) and A-T+N- (p<0.001). In the longitudinal analysis, 
CDR-SOB scores for A-T+N+ deteriorated faster than A-T-N- (p<0.001), A-T+N- 
(p<0.001) and A-T-N+ (p<0.001). Hippocampal atrophy progressed faster in A-T-N+ 
(p<0.001) and A-T+N+ (p=0.02) than in A-T-N-. Through this study, we discovered 
that even in individuals classified as amyloid negative, neurodegeneration with 
tau deposition exacerbates cognitive decline and worsens clinical symptoms, 
underscoring the need for continuous monitoring and observation.

© Chonnam Medical Journal, 2024.

DOI: 10.4068/cmj.2024.60.1.51
PMCID: PMC10828081
PMID: 38304128

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT: None declared.


181. Am J Clin Nutr. 2022 Dec 19;116(6):1492-1506. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/nqac236.

Associations of erythrocyte omega-3 fatty acids with cognition, brain imaging 
and biomarkers in the Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative: 
cross-sectional and longitudinal retrospective analyses.

Rouch L(1), Virecoulon Giudici K(1), Cantet C(1), Guyonnet S(1)(2), Delrieu 
J(1)(2)(3), Legrand P(4), Catheline D(4), Andrieu S(2)(5), Weiner 
M(6)(7)(8)(9)(10), de Souto Barreto P(1)(2), Vellas B(1)(2); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Gerontopole of Toulouse, Institute of Ageing, Toulouse University Hospital, 
Toulouse, Franc.
(2)CERPOP Centre d'Epidémiologie et de Recherche en Santé des Populations, 
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale 1295, University of 
Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(3)Toulouse NeuroImaging Center, Université de Toulouse, Institut National de la 
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, UPS, Toulouse, France.
(4)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Human Nutrition, Institut Agro, Institut 
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale 1241, Rennes, France.
(5)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Toulouse University Hospital, 
Toulouse, France.
(6)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Clin Nutr. 2022 Dec 19;116(6):1474-1475. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/nqac248.

BACKGROUND: The association between omega-3 (ω-3) PUFAs and cognition, brain 
imaging and biomarkers is still not fully established.
OBJECTIVES: The aim was to analyze the cross-sectional and retrospective 
longitudinal associations between erythrocyte ω-3 index and cognition, brain 
imaging, and biomarkers among older adults.
METHODS: A total of 832 Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 3 (ADNI-3) 
participants, with a mean (SD) age of 74.0 (7.9) y, 50.8% female, 55.9% 
cognitively normal, 32.7% with mild cognitive impairment, and 11.4% with 
Alzheimer disease (AD) were included. A low ω-3 index (%EPA + %DHA) was defined 
as the lowest quartile (≤3.70%). Cognitive tests [composite score, AD Assessment 
Scale Cognitive (ADAS-Cog), Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS), Trail Making Test, 
Category Fluency, Mini-Mental State Examination, Montreal Cognitive Assessment] 
and brain variables [hippocampal volume, white matter hyperintensities (WMHs), 
positron emission tomography (PET) amyloid-β (Aβ) and tau] were considered as 
outcomes in regression models.
RESULTS: Low ω-3 index was not associated with cognition, hippocampal, and WMH 
volume or brain Aβ and tau after adjustment for demographics, ApoEε4, 
cardiovascular disease, BMI, and total intracranial volume in the 
cross-sectional analysis. In the retrospective analysis, low ω-3 index was 
associated with greater Aβ accumulation (adjusted β = 0.02; 95% CI: 0.01, 0.03; 
P = 0.003). The composite cognitive score did not differ between groups; 
however, low ω-3 index was significantly associated with greater WMS-delayed 
recall cognitive decline (adjusted β = -1.18; 95% CI: -2.16, -0.19; P = 0.019), 
but unexpectedly lower total ADAS-Cog cognitive decline. Low ω-3 index was 
cross-sectionally associated with lower WMS performance (adjusted β = -1.81, 
SE = 0.73, P = 0.014) and higher tau accumulation among ApoE ε4 carriers.
CONCLUSIONS: Longitudinally, low ω-3 index was associated with greater Aβ 
accumulation and WMS cognitive decline but unexpectedly with lower total 
ADAS-Cog cognitive decline. Although no associations were cross-sectionally 
found in the whole population, low ω-3 index was associated with lower WMS 
cognition and higher tau accumulation among ApoE ε4 carriers. The Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) is registered at clinicaltrials.gov as 
NCT00106899.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Society for Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/nqac236
PMCID: PMC9761759
PMID: 36253968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. PLoS One. 2023 May 8;18(5):e0285220. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0285220. 
eCollection 2023.

Does adding MRI and CSF-based biomarkers improve cognitive status classification 
based on cognitive performance questionnaires?

Farina MP(1)(2), Saenz J(3), Crimmins EM(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Gerontology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California, United States of America.
(2)Human Development and Family Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 
Texas, United States of America.
(3)Edson College of Nursing and Health Innovation, Arizona State University, 
Phoenix, Arizona, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Cognitive status classification (e.g. dementia, cognitive impairment 
without dementia, and normal) based on cognitive performance questionnaires has 
been widely used in population-based studies, providing insight into the 
population dynamics of dementia. However, researchers have raised concerns about 
the accuracy of cognitive assessments. MRI and CSF biomarkers may provide 
improved classification, but the potential improvement in classification in 
population-based studies is relatively unknown.
METHODS: Data come from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). 
We examined whether the addition of MRI and CSF biomarkers improved cognitive 
status classification based on cognitive status questionnaires (MMSE). We 
estimated several multinomial logistic regression models with different 
combinations of MMSE and CSF/MRI biomarkers. Based on these models, we also 
predicted prevalence of each cognitive status category using a model with MMSE 
only and a model with MMSE + MRI + CSF measures and compared them to diagnosed 
prevalence.
RESULTS: Our analysis showed a slight improvement in variance explained 
(pseudo-R2) between the model with MMSE only and the model including MMSE and 
MRI/CSF biomarkers; the pseudo-R2 increased from .401 to .445. Additionally, in 
evaluating differences in predicted prevalence for each cognitive status, we 
found a small improvement in the predicted prevalence of cognitively normal 
individuals between the MMSE only model and the model with MMSE and CSF/MRI 
biomarkers (3.1% improvement). We found no improvement in the correct prediction 
of dementia prevalence.
CONCLUSION: MRI and CSF biomarkers, while important for understanding dementia 
pathology in clinical research, were not found to substantially improve 
cognitive status classification based on cognitive status performance, which may 
limit adoption in population-based surveys due to costs, training, and 
invasiveness associated with their collection.

Copyright: © 2023 Farina et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0285220
PMCID: PMC10166486
PMID: 37155663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


183. Appl Neuropsychol Adult. 2022 Dec 29:1-6. doi: 10.1080/23279095.2022.2161050. 
Online ahead of print.

Clinical value of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment free recall condition alone 
versus cued recall and recognition conditions to detect true memory impairment.

De Wit L(1), Goldstein FC(1), Loring DW(1).

Author information:
(1)Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.

The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) is widely used as a screener to 
characterize cognition. Although only the delayed free recall condition is 
required for administration, performance on the optional cued recall and 
multiple-choice recognition conditions may improve diagnostic accuracy over free 
recall alone. Data on 719 individuals with MCI and 601 controls were obtained 
from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. The Rey 
Auditory Verbal Learning Test (AVLT) delayed free recall condition was used as 
the gold standard of memory status. Participants with T-scores ≤30 (≤2 SDs below 
the mean) were classified as memory "impaired." Binary logistic regressions 
assessed if combined MoCA cued recall/recognition predicted impaired delayed 
recall on the AVLT beyond the contribution of MoCA free recall. Results showed 
that MoCA free recall predicted AVLT delayed recall, and that the addition of 
combined MoCA cued recall/recognition improved the ability to detect impaired 
AVLT recall, with a better overall model fit. The combined MoCA cued 
recall/recognition score also had higher specificity and likelihood ratios in 
detecting memory impairment than MoCA free recall, while higher sensitivity 
values were present for free recall. Thus, the additional administration of the 
MoCA cued recall and recognition is recommended.

DOI: 10.1080/23279095.2022.2161050
PMID: 36583247


184. J Alzheimers Dis. 2019;70(2):361-370. doi: 10.3233/JAD-190370.

Impact of Resilience on the Association Between Amyloid-β and Longitudinal 
Cognitive Decline in Cognitively Healthy Older Adults.

Wolf D(1)(2), Fischer FU(1)(2), Fellgiebel A(1)(2); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center Mainz, 
Mainz, Germany.
(2)Center for Mental Health in Old Age, Mainz, Germany.

The present study aims at investigating if the association between amyloid-β and 
longitudinal cognitive decline in cognitively healthy elderly is modulated by 
resilience capacity. Resilience capacity was quantified by education, which is a 
common proxy of resilience and has been shown to be related to a wide range of 
behaviors promoting resilience. Analyses were conducted with longitudinal 
cognitive data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). 276 
cognitively healthy older individuals (≥56 years) were included in the study. 
Baseline amyloid pathology was quantified using CSF amyloid-β 1-42 measurements. 
Longitudinal cognitive decline was assessed using ADAS13, Clinical Dementia 
Rating - Sum of Boxes, and ADNI-Memory composite scores. Duration of follow-up 
was 10 years (mean follow-up: 2.6 years). Linear mixed effects models 
demonstrated stronger cognitive decline over time with increasing baseline 
amyloid. Subsequent mixed-effects analyses showed that this amyloid-related 
cognitive decline is stronger in individuals with lower resilience capacity 
(i.e., lower levels of education). Of note, this effect was not an artifact of 
differences in neurodegeneration patterns between individuals with lower and 
higher resilience. Results suggest that resilience capacity has high potential 
to counteract early amyloid pathology and to significantly slow cognitive 
decline.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-190370
PMID: 31256140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2023 Apr;42(4):959-970. doi: 10.1109/TMI.2022.3221890. 
Epub 2023 Apr 3.

ICAM-Reg: Interpretable Classification and Regression With Feature Attribution 
for Mapping Neurological Phenotypes in Individual Scans.

Bass C, Silva MD, Sudre C, Williams LZJ, Sousa HS, Tudosiu PD, Alfaro-Almagro F, 
Fitzgibbon SP, Glasser MF, Smith SM, Robinson EC.

An important goal of medical imaging is to be able to precisely detect patterns 
of disease specific to individual scans; however, this is challenged in brain 
imaging by the degree of heterogeneity of shape and appearance. Traditional 
methods, based on image registration, historically fail to detect variable 
features of disease, as they utilise population-based analyses, suited primarily 
to studying group-average effects. In this paper we therefore take advantage of 
recent developments in generative deep learning to develop a method for 
simultaneous classification, or regression, and feature attribution (FA). 
Specifically, we explore the use of a VAE-GAN (variational autoencoder - general 
adversarial network) for translation called ICAM, to explicitly disentangle 
class relevant features, from background confounds, for improved 
interpretability and regression of neurological phenotypes. We validate our 
method on the tasks of Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) cognitive test score 
prediction for the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort, as 
well as brain age prediction, for both neurodevelopment and neurodegeneration, 
using the developing Human Connectome Project (dHCP) and UK Biobank datasets. We 
show that the generated FA maps can be used to explain outlier predictions and 
demonstrate that the inclusion of a regression module improves the 
disentanglement of the latent space. Our code is freely available on GitHub 
https://github.com/CherBass/ICAM.

DOI: 10.1109/TMI.2022.3221890
PMCID: PMC10315989
PMID: 36374873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Neurobiol Aging. 2024 Dec 13;147:60-67. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2024.12.002. Online ahead of print.

Modeling functional loss in Alzheimer's Disease through cognitive reserve and 
cognitive state: A panel data longitudinal study.

Veronelli L(1), Tosi G(2), Romano D(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca and Milan Center for 
Neuroscience, Milan, Italy; Department of Neurorehabilitation Sciences, Casa di 
Cura IGEA, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: laura.veronelli@unimib.it.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca and Milan Center for 
Neuroscience, Milan, Italy.

Cognitive Reserve (CR) refers to the brain's ability, supported by active and 
modifiable forms of lifestyle compensation, to cope with neural changes due to 
age or disease, delaying the onset of cognitive deficits. In CR studies, 
neuropsychological performances and functional autonomy are considered 
alternative outcomes. While decreased functional independence gains importance 
in dementia diagnosis and monitoring, cognitive functioning may play a role in 
staging its severity. The main aim of the present study was to test a 
longitudinal model of Alzheimer's Disease (AD), in which CR (years of education) 
and current cognitive status (Mini-Mental State Examination, MMSE, score) would 
predict clinical progression in terms of loss of functional independence at a 
later time. From the ADNI database, we considered 308 AD participants, and for 
180 of them, we could extract CSF Aβ1-42 baseline levels as an index of amyloid 
burden. Functional decline (one-year delta score at the Functional Activities of 
Daily Living Questionnaire) was explained by the CR and MMSE score interaction 
net of age; a trend was found also when controlling for amyloid burden. 
Functional decline at one year was increased for patients with high CR levels 
and low MMSE and with low CR and high cognitive state, compared to the opposite. 
The present investigation demonstrated the mutual role of past acquired CR and 
current cognitive status in predicting functional progression in AD. The study 
suggests a way to predictively interpret available demographic and clinical 
data, defining differential longitudinal trajectories that might be useful for 
clinical management.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2024.12.002
PMID: 39708761

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.


187. J Alzheimers Dis. 2024;101(3):923-936. doi: 10.3233/JAD-240532.

A Novel Score to Predict Individual Risk for Future Alzheimer's Disease: A 
Longitudinal Study of the ADNI Cohort.

Guo H(1), Sun S(1), Yang Y(2), Ma R(3), Wang C(1), Zheng S(1), Wang X(1), Li 
G(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; Alzheimer’s Disease 
Metabolomics Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of General Medicine, Binzhou Medical University Hospital, Binzhou, 
China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medicine, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: Identifying high-risk individuals with mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) who are likely to progress to Alzheimer's disease (AD) is crucial for 
early intervention.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to develop and validate a novel clinical score for 
personalized estimation of MCI-to-AD conversion.
METHODS: The data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
study were analyzed. Two-thirds of the MCI patients were randomly assigned to a 
training cohort (n = 478), and the remaining one-third formed the validation 
cohort (n = 239). Multivariable logistic regression was performed to identify 
factors associated with MCI-to-AD progression within 4 years. A prediction score 
was developed based on the regression coefficients derived from the logistic 
model and tested in the validation cohort.
RESULTS: A lipidomics-signature was obtained that showed a significant 
association with disease progression. The MCI conversion scoring system (ranged 
from 0 to 14 points), consisting of the lipidomics-signature and five other 
significant variables (Apolipoprotein ɛ4, Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test 
immediate and delayed recall, Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale delayed 
recall test, Functional Activities Questionnaire, and cortical thickness of the 
AD signature), was constructed. Higher conversion scores were associated with a 
higher proportion of patients converting to AD. The scoring system demonstrated 
good discrimination and calibration in both the training cohort (AUC = 0.879, p 
of Hosmer-Lemeshow test = 0.597) and the validation cohort (AUC = 0.915, p of 
Hosmer-Lemeshow test = 0.991). The risk classification achieved excellent 
sensitivity (0.84) and specificity (0.75).
CONCLUSIONS: The MCI-to-AD conversion score is a reliable tool for predicting 
the risk of disease progression in individuals with MCI.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-240532
PMID: 39240641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021 Dec 15;13:764272. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.764272. 
eCollection 2021.

Deep Learning With 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose-PET Gives Valid Diagnoses for the 
Uncertain Cases in Memory Impairment of Alzheimer's Disease.

Zhang W(1)(2), Zhang T(1), Pan T(3), Zhao S(1)(2), Nie B(1), Liu H(1), Shan 
B(1)(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Beijing Engineering Research Center of Radiographic Techniques and Equipment, 
Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)School of Nuclear Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)School of Physics and Microelectronics, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 
China.

Objectives: Neuropsychological tests are an important basis for the memory 
impairment diagnosis in Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, multiple memory tests 
might be conflicting within-subjects and lead to uncertain diagnoses in some 
cases. This study proposed a framework to diagnose the uncertain cases of memory 
impairment. Methods: We collected 2,386 samples including AD, mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), and cognitive normal (CN) using 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose 
positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) and three different neuropsychological 
tests (Mini-Mental State Examination, Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-Cognitive Subscale, and Clinical Dementia Rating) from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). A deep learning (DL) framework using 
FDG-PET was proposed to diagnose uncertain memory impairment cases that were 
conflicting between tests. Subsequent ANOVA, chi-squared, and t-test were used 
to explain the potential causes of uncertain cases. Results: For certain cases 
in the testing set, the proposed DL framework outperformed other methods with 
95.65% accuracy. For the uncertain cases, its positive diagnoses had a 
significant (p < 0.001) worse decline in memory function than negative diagnoses 
in a longitudinal study of 40 months on average. In the memory-impaired group, 
uncertain cases were mainly explained by an AD metabolism pattern but mild in 
extent (p < 0.05). In the healthy group, uncertain cases were mainly explained 
by a non-energetic mental state (p < 0.001) measured using a global 
deterioration scale (GDS), with a significant depression-related metabolism 
pattern detected (p < 0.05). Conclusion: A DL framework for diagnosing uncertain 
cases of memory impairment is proposed. Proved by longitudinal tracing of its 
diagnoses, it showed clinical validity and had application potential. Its valid 
diagnoses also provided evidence and explanation of uncertain cases based on the 
neurodegeneration and depression mental state.

Copyright © 2021 Zhang, Zhang, Pan, Zhao, Nie, Liu, Shan and Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.764272
PMCID: PMC8715958
PMID: 34975455

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


189. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2024 Sep;30(9):e70051. doi: 10.1111/cns.70051.

A prediction model of dementia conversion for mild cognitive impairment by 
combining plasma pTau181 and structural imaging features.

Li TR(1), Li BL(2)(3), Zhong J(1), Xu XR(1), Wang TS(1)(4), Liu FQ(1)(2); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Jiangsu Province Hospital, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Jiangsu Province Hospital, Nanjing, China.
(3)Beijing Children's Hospital, Beijing Pediatric Research Institute, Capital 
Medical University, National Center for Children's Health, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Yangzhou Friendship Hospital, Yangzhou, China.

AIMS: The early stages of Alzheimer's disease (AD) are no longer insurmountable. 
Therefore, identifying at-risk individuals is of great importance for precise 
treatment. We developed a model to predict cognitive deterioration in patients 
with mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: Based on the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
database, we constructed models in a derivation cohort of 761 participants with 
MCI (138 of whom developed dementia at the 36th month) and verified them in a 
validation cohort of 353 cognitively normal controls (54 developed MCI and 19 
developed dementia at the 36th month). In addition, 1303 participants with 
available AD cerebrospinal fluid core biomarkers were selected to clarify the 
ability of the model to predict AD core features. We assessed 32 parameters as 
candidate predictors, including clinical information, blood biomarkers, and 
structural imaging features, and used multivariable logistic regression analysis 
to develop our prediction model.
RESULTS: Six independent variables of MCI deterioration were identified: 
apolipoprotein E ε4 allele status, lower Mini-Mental State Examination scores, 
higher levels of plasma pTau181, smaller volumes of the left hippocampus and 
right amygdala, and a thinner right inferior temporal cortex. We established an 
easy-to-use risk heat map and risk score based on these risk factors. The area 
under the curve (AUC) for both internal and external validations was close to 
0.850. Furthermore, the AUC was above 0.800 in identifying participants with 
high brain amyloid-β loads. Calibration plots demonstrated good agreement 
between the predicted probability and actual observations in the internal and 
external validations.
CONCLUSION: We developed and validated an accurate prediction model for dementia 
conversion in patients with MCI. Simultaneously, the model predicts AD-specific 
pathological changes. We hope that this model will contribute to more precise 
clinical treatment and better healthcare resource allocation.

© 2024 The Author(s). CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cns.70051
PMCID: PMC11410557
PMID: 39294845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: On behalf of all authors, the corresponding 
author confirms no conflict of interest. All authors agreed to the publication 
of the manuscript in its current form.


190. Curr Med Imaging. 2021;17(7):889-896. doi: 10.2174/1573405616666201223150004.

The Differential Diagnostic Value of the Callosal Angle and Evans Index in Mild 
Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer's Disease.

Liu M(1), Zhang J(1), Zong L(2), Fan W(2), Wang B(2), Chen Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, First Medical Center of Chinese PLA General 
Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.
(2)Department of Radiology, Hainan Hospital of Chinese PLA General Hospital, 
Sanya 572013, China.

BACKGROUND: Callosal Angle (CA) and Evans Index (EI) are considered as imaging 
biomarkers to diagnose normal-pressure hydrocephalus using traditional MR 
measurement methods.
OBJECTIVE: The current study aimed to evaluate the differential diagnostic value 
of CA and EI in Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's Disease (AD).
METHODS: Five-hundred and two subjects were selected from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database, which included 168 Normal 
Controls (NC), 233 MCI and 101 AD patients. The structural MR images were 
interactively applied with multiplanar reconstruction to measure the CA and EI.
RESULTS: CA presented no significant difference among NC, MCI and AD groups (H 
value = 3.848, P value = 0.146), and EI demonstrated higher value in MCI and AD 
groups than that in NC groups (P = 0.000 and 0.001, respectively). MCI group had 
significant larger EI (0.29±0.04) than (0.27±0.03) NC group in 70-75 years old 
sub-groups. ROC showed that the area under the curve was 0.704±0.045 for NC-MCI 
in 70-75 years old groups. The correlation analysis indicated that EI was 
significantly negatively related to MMSE scores of MCI patients (r = -0.131, P = 
0.046).
CONCLUSION: EI might serve as a screening imaging biomarker for MCI in 70-75 
years old patients, and show limited differential value for the diagnosis of AD. 
CA could present no diagnostic value for MCI and AD in the current study.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1573405616666201223150004
PMCID: PMC8811612
PMID: 33357199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2016;3(2):92-100. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2016.90.

Longitudinal Trajectories of Clinical Decline in Amyloid Positive and Negative 
Populations.

Trzepacz PT(1), Hochstetler H, Wang S, Yu P, Case M, Henley DB, Degenhardt E, 
Leoutsakos JM, Lyketsos CG.

Author information:
(1)Helen Hochstetler, Lilly Corporate Center, Indianapolis, IN 46285; Phone: 
317-433-3707; E-mail: hochstetler_helen_m@lilly.com.

BACKGROUND: Brain beta-amyloid status portends different trajectories of 
clinical decline.
OBJECTIVE: Determine trajectories and predictive baseline variable(s).
DESIGN: Longitudinal, up to 24 months.
SETTING: ADNI sites.
PARTICIPANTS: Healthy control (n=325), early and late mild cognitive impairment 
(n=279; n=372), and Alzheimer's dementia (n=216) subjects from ADNI-1/GO/2.
MEASUREMENTS: Baseline amyloid status was based on first available CSF Aβ1-42 
or, [11C]PiB or [18F]florbetapir (FBP) PET. Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog13) and Functional Activities Questionnaire 
(FAQ) were co-analyzed using Growth Mixture Modeling (GMM) to define latent 
class trajectories for each amyloid group. Classification and Regression Tree 
(CART) analysis determined which variables best predicted trajectory class 
membership using a number of variables available to clinicians.
RESULTS: GMMs found two trajectory classes (C1, C2) each for amyloid-positive 
(P; n=722) and negative (N; n=470) groups. Most (90%) in the negative group were 
C2N with mildly impaired baseline ADAS-Cog13, normal FAQ and nonprogression; 10% 
were C1N with moderately impaired baseline FAQ and ADAS-Cog13 and trajectory of 
moderately worsening scores on the FAQ. C1P (26%) had more impaired baseline FAQ 
and ADAS-Cog13 than C2P (74%) and a steeper declining trajectory. CART yielded 4 
decision nodes (FAQ <10.5, FAQ <6.5, MMSE ≥26.5, age <75.5) in positive and 1 
node (FAQ <6.5) in negative groups, with 91.4% and 92.8% accuracy for class 
assignments, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The trajectory pattern of greater decline in amyloid positive 
subjects was predicted by greater baseline impairment of cognition and function. 
While most amyloid-negative subjects had nonprogression irrespective of their 
diagnosis, a subgroup declined similarly to the gradually declining 
amyloid-positive group. CART predicted likely trajectory class, with known 
amyloid status, using variables accessible in a clinical setting, but needs 
replication.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2016.90
PMID: 29210444

Conflict of interest statement: Drs. Hochstetler, Wang, and Henley, and Mr. Case 
are full-time employees and minor shareholders of Eli Lilly and Company. Drs. 
Trzepacz and Yu and Ms. Degenhardt were full-time employees and minor 
shareholders of Eli Lilly and Company at the time this work was completed. Dr. 
Lyketsos has or is currently receiving grant support (research or CME) from 
NIMH, NIA, Associated Jewish Federation of Baltimore, Weinberg Foundation, 
Forest, Glaxo-Smith-Kline, Eisai, Pfizer, Astra-Zeneca, Eli Lilly and Company, 
Ortho-McNeil, Bristol-Myers, Novartis, National Football League, Elan, 
Functional Neuromodulation; payment as a consultant or advisor from 
Astra-Zeneca, Glaxo-Smith Kline, Eisai, Novartis, Forest, Supernus, Adlyfe, 
Takeda, Wyeth, Lundbeck, Merz, Eli Lilly and Company, Pfizer, Genentech, Elan, 
NFL Players Association, NFL Benefits Office, Avanir, Zinfandel, BMS, Abbvie, 
Janssen, Orion, Otsuka, Servier, Astellas, and honorarium or travel support from 
Pfizer, Forest, Glaxo-Smith Kline, Health Monitor. Dr. Leoutsakos has received 
NIH funding and has been an unpaid consultant for Eli Lilly and Company.


192. Curr J Neurol. 2023 Oct 7;22(4):221-230. doi: 10.18502/cjn.v22i4.14526.

Plasma neurofilament light chain associated with impaired regional cerebral 
blood flow in healthy individuals.

Nabizadeh F(1)(2), Ward RT(3)(4), Balabandian M(1), Kankam SB(5), Pourhamzeh 
M(6).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Group, Universal Scientific Education and Research 
Network, Tehran, Iran.
(2)School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Center for the Study of Emotion and Attention, University of Florida, 
Florida, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Florida, Florida, USA.
(5)School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Division of Neuroscience, Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Iran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Background: Recent findings suggest that the plasma axonal structural protein, 
neurofilament light (NFL) chain, may serve as a potential blood biomarker for 
early signs of neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
Given the need for early detection of neurodegenerative disorders, the current 
study investigated the associations between regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) 
in brain regions associated with neurodegenerative disorders and memory function 
with plasma NFL in AD, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and healthy controls 
(HCs). Methods: We recruited 29 AD, 76 MCI, and 39 HCs from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database in the current cross-sectional 
study. We used Pearson's correlation models adjusted for the effect of age, sex, 
and APOE genotype to investigate the association between plasma NFL and rCBF. 
Results: We found non-significant differences in age (F(2, 141) = 1.304; P = 
0.275) and years of education (F(2, 141) = 0.013; P = 0.987). Additionally, we 
found significant differences between groups in terms of MMSE scores (F(2, 141) 
= 100.953; P < 0.001). Despite the observation of significantly reduced rCBF in 
AD and MCI groups versus HCs, we did not detect significant differences in 
plasma NFL between these groups. We found significant negative associations 
between plasma NFL and rCBF in various AD-related regions, these findings were 
only observed after analyses in all participants, and were observed in HCs alone 
and no significant associations were observed in the AD or MCI groups. 
Conclusion: These outcomes add to our current understanding surrounding the use 
of rCBF and plasma NFL biomarkers as tools for early detection and diagnosis of 
neurodegenerative diseases. A conclusion might be that the association between 
NFL and impaired rCBF exists before the clinical symptoms appear. Further 
longitudinal studies with a large sample size should be performed to examine the 
correlation between plasma NFL and rCBF in order to understand these complex 
relationships.

Copyright © 2023 Iranian Neurological Association, and Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences Published by Tehran University of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.18502/cjn.v22i4.14526
PMCID: PMC10899537
PMID: 38425361

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest in 
this study.


193. J Alzheimers Dis. 2019;70(2):477-486. doi: 10.3233/JAD-190070.

Quantitative Brain Amyloid Measures Predict Time-to-Progression from Amnestic 
Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer's Disease.

Jun S(1), Kim H(1), Kim BS(1), Yoo BG(2), Lee WG(2); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Departement of Nuclear Medicine, Kosin University Gospel Hospital, University 
of Kosin College of Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea.
(2)Departement of Neurology, Kosin University Gospel Hospital, University of 
Kosin College of Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: This study was designed to investigate factors that predict 
progression from amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) to probable 
Alzheimer's disease (AD).
OBJECTIVE: We studied the usefulness of quantitative assessment of amyloid 
burden measured by Florbetapir PET scan.
METHODS: The study cohort consisted of aMCI participants older than 65 and those 
with available Florbetapir PET scan at diagnosis from the ADNI database 
(http://adni.loni.usc.edu). To assess the prognostic impact of amyloid burden, a 
staging system based on the global SUVr of the PET scan was applied. We defined 
the stages as: stage I, negative amyloid scan; stage II, positive amyloid in 1st 
tertile; stage III, positive amyloid in 2nd tertile; and stage IV, positive 
amyloid in 3rd tertile.
RESULTS: Of 250 eligible aMCI subjects (age 74.1±5.4, female n = 105), 71 
(28.4%) were diagnosed with probable AD within 3 years. Higher amyloid stages 
showed faster cognitive decline by Kaplan-Meier analysis. In multivariate Cox 
analysis, with stage I as a reference, the hazard ratio (HR) increased as the 
stage increased: stage II (HR, 4.509; p = 0.015), stage III (HR, 7.616; 
p = 0.001), and stage IV (HR, 9.421; p < 0.001). Along with amyloid stage, ApoE 
ɛ4 (HR, 1.943; p = 0.031), score of CDR-SB (HR, 1.845; p < 0.001) and ADAS 11 
(HR, 1.144; p < 0.001), and hippocampal volume (HR, 0.002; p = 0.005) were also 
identified as predictors of dementia progression in aMCI subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Large amyloid burden measured from amyloid PET scan could be a 
predictor of faster cognitive decline in aMCI patients.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-190070
PMID: 31256127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;79(3):1133-1142. doi: 10.3233/JAD-201122.

Financial Capacity and Regional Cerebral Tau in Cognitively Normal Older Adults, 
Mild Cognitive Impairment, and Alzheimer's Disease Dementia.

Gonzalez C(1)(2)(3), Tommasi NS(1)(2), Briggs D(1)(2)(3), Properzi MJ(3), 
Amariglio RE(1)(2)(3), Marshall GA(1)(2)(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Center for Alzheimer Research and Treatment, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Financial capacity is often one of the first instrumental activities 
of daily living to be affected in cognitively normal (CN) older adults who later 
progress to amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) dementia.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to investigate the association 
between financial capacity and regional cerebral tau.
METHODS: Cross-sectional financial capacity was assessed using the Financial 
Capacity Instrument -Short Form (FCI-SF) in 410 CN, 199 MCI, and 61 AD dementia 
participants who underwent flortaucipir tau positron emission tomography from 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Linear regression models 
with backward elimination were used with FCI-SF total score as the dependent 
variable and regional tau and tau-amyloid interaction as predictors of interest 
in separate analyses. Education, age, sex, Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test 
Total Learning, and Trail Making Test B were used as covariates.
RESULTS: Significant associations were found between FCI-SF and tau regions 
(entorhinal: p < 0.001; inferior temporal: p < 0.001; dorsolateral prefrontal: 
p = 0.01; posterior cingulate: p = 0.03; precuneus: p < 0.001; and supramarginal 
gyrus: p = 0.005) across all participants. For the tau-amyloid interaction, 
significant associations were found in four regions (amyloid and dorsolateral 
prefrontal tau interaction: p = 0.005; amyloid and posterior cingulate tau 
interaction: p = 0.005; amyloid and precuneus tau interaction: p < 0.001; and 
amyloid and supramarginal tau interaction: p = 0.002).
CONCLUSION: Greater regional tau burden was modestly associated with financial 
capacity impairment in early-stage AD. Extending this work with longitudinal 
analyses will further illustrate the utility of such assessments in detecting 
clinically meaningful decline, which may aid clinical trials of early-stage AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-201122
PMCID: PMC7870560
PMID: 33386806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2018 Nov 26;4:645-651. doi: 10.1016/j.trci.2018.10.004. 
eCollection 2018.

Clinical and cognitive characteristics of preclinical Alzheimer's disease in the 
Japanese Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative cohort.

Ihara R(1)(2), Iwata A(3), Suzuki K(1), Ikeuchi T(4), Kuwano R(4), Iwatsubo 
T(1)(5); Japanese Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Unit for Early and Exploratory Clinical Development, The University of Tokyo 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Innovative Dementia Prevention, Graduate School of Medicine, 
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, Bioresource Science Branch, Center for 
Bioresources, Brain Research Institute, Niigata University, Niigata, Japan.
(5)Department of Neuropathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: The objective of this study was to determine the frequency and 
clinical and cognitive characteristics of preclinical Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
in a Japanese population to effectively design and conduct future preventive 
trials on preclinical AD.
METHODS: Three-year longitudinal data from cognitively normal participants who 
underwent cerebrospinal fluid biomarker measurement and/or amyloid positron 
emission tomography in the Japanese Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, 
were analyzed. Comparisons between participants with and without amyloid β (Aβ) 
accumulation, and between those with and without elevated tau levels tau among 
participants with Aβ accumulation were performed.
RESULTS: Among 84 participants with available cerebrospinal fluid biomarker 
and/or amyloid positron emission tomography data, 19 (22.6%) exhibited Aβ 
accumulation. The frequency of APOE ε4 alleles was significantly higher in 
participants with Aβ accumulation. There were no significant differences in any 
of the cognitive tests at the baseline; however, participants with Aβ 
accumulation exhibited a decline in clock drawing test (linear mixed-effects 
model, P = .008) and a tendency toward loss of practice effects in the 
Mini-Mental State Examination and the logical memory over time. Although it did 
not reach statistical significance, the analysis indicated a decline in 
measurements of executive function over time in participants with elevated tau 
levels compared with those with normal tau levels.
DISCUSSION: The frequency of preclinical AD in the Japanese Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative was lower than in similar studies because of the younger 
age of the participants and lower frequency of APOE ε4 carriage. Although 
limitations in sample size precluded definitive conclusions, the results suggest 
that even in the preclinical phase of AD, loss of practice effects in episodic 
memory tests and at a later stage, decline in executive function, are present. 
These findings may be useful for recruitment of individuals with preclinical AD 
and establishing a novel cognitive composite for use in clinical trials on 
preclinical AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trci.2018.10.004
PMCID: PMC6258138
PMID: 30511010


196. Brain Sci. 2023 Oct 31;13(11):1535. doi: 10.3390/brainsci13111535.

Explainable Machine Learning with Pairwise Interactions for Predicting 
Conversion from Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer's Disease Utilizing 
Multi-Modalities Data.

Cai J(1), Hu W(1), Ma J(2), Si A(1), Chen S(1), Gong L(1), Zhang Y(3), Yan 
H(1)(4), Chen F(1)(4)(5), For The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Xi'an 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Xi'an Gaoxin Hospital, Xi'an 710077, China.
(3)Department of Surgical Oncology, First Affiliate Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, Xi'an 710061, China.
(4)Key Laboratory for Disease Prevention and Control and Health Promotion of 
Shaanxi Province, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China.
(5)Department of Radiology, First Affiliate Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, Xi'an 710061, China.

BACKGROUND: Predicting cognition decline in patients with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) is crucial for identifying high-risk individuals and 
implementing effective management. To improve predicting MCI-to-AD conversion, 
it is necessary to consider various factors using explainable machine learning 
(XAI) models which provide interpretability while maintaining predictive 
accuracy. This study used the Explainable Boosting Machine (EBM) model with 
multimodal features to predict the conversion of MCI to AD during different 
follow-up periods while providing interpretability.
METHODS: This retrospective case-control study is conducted with data obtained 
from the ADNI database, with records of 1042 MCI patients from 2006 to 2022 
included. The exposures included in this study were MRI biomarkers, cognitive 
scores, demographics, and clinical features. The main outcome was AD conversion 
from aMCI during follow-up. The EBM model was utilized to predict aMCI 
converting to AD based on three feature combinations, obtaining interpretability 
while ensuring accuracy. Meanwhile, the interaction effect was considered in the 
model. The three feature combinations were compared in different follow-up 
periods with accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and AUC-ROC. The global and 
local explanations are displayed by importance ranking and feature 
interpretability plots.
RESULTS: The five-years prediction accuracy reached 85% (AUC = 0.92) using both 
cognitive scores and MRI markers. Apart from accuracies, we obtained features' 
importance in different follow-up periods. In early stage of AD, the MRI markers 
play a major role, while for middle-term, the cognitive scores are more 
important. Feature risk scoring plots demonstrated insightful nonlinear 
interactive associations between selected factors and outcome. In one-year 
prediction, lower right inferior temporal volume (<9000) is significantly 
associated with AD conversion. For two-year prediction, low left inferior 
temporal thickness (<2) is most critical. For three-year prediction, higher FAQ 
scores (>4) is the most important. During four-year prediction, APOE4 is the 
most critical. For five-year prediction, lower right entorhinal volume (<1000) 
is the most critical feature.
CONCLUSIONS: The established glass-box model EBMs with multimodal features 
demonstrated a superior ability with detailed interpretability in predicting AD 
conversion from MCI. Multi features with significant importance were identified. 
Further study may be of significance to determine whether the established 
prediction tool would improve clinical management for AD patients.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci13111535
PMCID: PMC10670176
PMID: 38002495

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


197. J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn. 2012 Dec;39(6):601-18. doi: 
10.1007/s10928-012-9271-3. Epub 2012 Sep 19.

Modeling of Functional Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ) as continuous bounded data 
from the ADNI database.

Ito K(1), Hutmacher MM, Corrigan BW.

Author information:
(1)Pfizer Inc, Primary Care Business Unit, 445 Eastern Point Road, Groton, CT 
06340, USA. kaori.ito@pfizer.com

An assessment of abilities to function independently in daily life is an 
important clinical endpoint for all Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients and 
caregivers. A mathematical model was developed to describe the natural history 
of change of the Functional Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ) from data obtained in 
normal elderly, mild cognitive impairment, and mild AD in the AD neuroimaging 
initiative (ADNI) study. FAQ is a bounded outcome (ranging from 0 to 30), with 0 
scored as "no impairment" and 30 as "severely impaired". Since many normal 
elderly patients had 0 scores and some AD patients had scores of 30 in the ADNI 
database, a censored approach for handling the boundary data was compared with a 
standard approach, which ignores the bounded nature of the data. Baseline 
severity, ApoE4 genotype, age, sex, and imaging biomarkers were tested as 
covariates. The censored approach greatly improved the predictability of the 
disease progression in FAQ scores. The basic method for handling boundary data 
used in this analysis is also applicable to handle boundary observations for 
numerous other endpoints.

DOI: 10.1007/s10928-012-9271-3
PMID: 22990808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Int Psychogeriatr. 2015 Mar;27(3):429-37. doi: 10.1017/S1041610214002129. Epub 
2014 Sep 26.

Is there an MCI reversion to cognitively normal? Analysis of Alzheimer's disease 
biomarkers profiles.

Park MH(1), Han C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology,Korea University Medical College and Korea University 
Ansan Hospital,South Korea.
(2)Department of Psychiatry,Korea University Medical College and Korea 
University Ansan Hospital,South Korea.

BACKGROUND: We investigated the characteristics of Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
biomarkers for mild cognitive impairment (MCI) reversion to cognitively normal 
(CN).
METHODS: Of a total of 1,233 participants from the ADNI database, 42 
participants with MCI reversion to CN (MCIr), 778 with MCI, and 413 CN were 
obtained. We evaluated demographics, clinical outcomes, medication use, MCI 
type, and AD biomarkers, including genetic, cerebrospinal fluid, imaging, and 
neuropsychological data.
RESULTS: This study showed that the differences between MCIr and CN were only 
age, Mini-Mental State Examination, and Clinical Dementia Rating - Sum of Boxes, 
but the differences between MCIr and MCI were not only clinical outcomes but 
also AD biomarkers, including genetic, cerebrospinal fluid, imaging, and 
neuropsychological data. Overall, MCIr may be similar to CN and not MCI in 
clinical characteristics.
CONCLUSIONS: With assessment of MCI reversion to CN, the possibility of 
false-positive errors should be considered. With the assistance of AD 
biomarkers, MCI can be evaluated more accurately than the conventional criteria.

DOI: 10.1017/S1041610214002129
PMID: 25255915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Alzheimers Dement. 2013 Feb;9(1 Suppl):S10-20. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.08.006. 
Epub 2012 Dec 17.

Putting the Alzheimer's cognitive test to the test II: Rasch Measurement Theory.

Hobart J(1), Cano S, Posner H, Selnes O, Stern Y, Thomas R, Zajicek J; 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neurology Research Group, Plymouth University Peninsula Schools of 
Medicine and Dentistry, Plymouth, UK. Jeremy.Hobart@pms.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Behavior section 
(ADAS-Cog) is the most widely used measure of cognitive performance in AD 
clinical trials. This key role has rightly brought its performance under 
increased scrutiny with recent research using traditional psychometric methods, 
questioning the ADAS-Cog's ability to adequately measure early-stage disease. 
However, given the limitations of traditional psychometric approaches, herein we 
use the more sophisticated Rasch Measurement Theory (RMT) methods to fully 
examine the strengths and weaknesses of the ADAS-Cog, and identify potential 
paths toward its improvement.
METHODS: We analyzed AD Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) ADAS-Cog data (675 
measurements across four time-points over 2 years) from the AD participants. RMT 
analysis was undertaken to examine three broad areas: adequacy of 
scale-to-sample targeting; degree to which, taken together, the ADAS-Cog items 
adequately perform as a measuring instrument; and how well the scale measured 
the subjects in the current sample.
RESULTS: The 11 ADAS-Cog components mapped-out a measurement continuum, worked 
together adequately, and were stable across different time-points and samples. 
However, the scale did not prove to be a good match to the patient sample 
supporting previous research. RMT analysis also identified problematic "gaps" 
and "bunching" of the components across the continuum.
CONCLUSION: Although the ADAS-Cog has the building blocks of a good measurement 
instrument, this sophisticated analysis confirms limitations with potentially 
serious implications for clinical trials. Importantly, and unlike traditional 
psychometric methods, our RMT analysis has provided important clues aimed at 
solving the measurement problems of the ADAS-Cog.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.08.006
PMID: 23253779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 8;9(12):e114777. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114777. 
eCollection 2014.

Association between NME8 locus polymorphism and cognitive decline, cerebrospinal 
fluid and neuroimaging biomarkers in Alzheimer's disease.

Liu Y(1), Yu JT(2), Wang HF(3), Hao XK(4), Yang YF(5), Jiang T(6), Zhu XC(3), 
Cao L(3), Zhang DQ(4), Tan L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Dalian Medical University, Qingdao Municipal 
Hospital, Qingdao, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Dalian Medical University, Qingdao Municipal 
Hospital, Qingdao, China; Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, 
School of Medicine, Qingdao University, China; Department of Neurology, Qingdao 
Municipal Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China.
(4)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China.
(5)Air Beijing Dongjiao Lane Community Health, Beijing, China.
(6)Department of Neurology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China.

Recently, a large meta-analysis of five genome wide association studies (GWAS) 
identified a novel locus (rs2718058) adjacent to NME8 that played a preventive 
role in Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, this link between the single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs2718058 and the pathology of AD have not been 
mentioned yet. Therefore, this study assessed the strength of association 
between the NME8 rs2718058 genotypes and AD-related measures including the 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) amyloid beta, tau, P-tau concentrations, neuroimaging 
biomarkers and cognitive performance, in a large cohort from Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. We used information of a total of 719 
individuals, including 211 normal cognition (NC), 346 mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) and 162 AD. Although we didn't observe a positive relationship between 
rs2718058 and AD, it was significantly associated with several AD related 
endophenotypes. Among the normal cognitively normal participants, the minor 
allele G carriers showed significantly associated with higher CDRSB score than A 
allele carriers (P = 0.021). Occipital gyrus atrophy were significantly 
associated with NME8 genotype status (P = 0.002), with A allele carriers has 
more atrophy than the minor allele G carriers in AD patients; lateral ventricle 
(both right and left) cerebral metabolic rate for glucose (CMRgl) were 
significantly associated with NME8 genotype (P < 0.05), with GA genotype had 
higher metabolism than GG and AA genotypes in MCI group; the atrophic right 
hippocampus in 18 months is significantly different between the three group, 
with GG and AA genotypes had more hippocampus atrophy than GA genotypes in the 
whole group. Together, our results are consistent with the direction of previous 
research, suggesting that NME8 rs2718058 appears to play a role in lowering the 
brain neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114777
PMCID: PMC4259473
PMID: 25486118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


201. Neuroimage Clin. 2019;24:101954. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2019.101954. Epub 2019 Jul 
23.

Multi-study validation of data-driven disease progression models to characterize 
evolution of biomarkers in Alzheimer's disease.

Archetti D(1), Ingala S(2), Venkatraghavan V(3), Wottschel V(4), Young AL(5), 
Bellio M(6), Bron EE(7), Klein S(8), Barkhof F(9), Alexander DC(10), Oxtoby 
NP(11), Frisoni GB(12), Redolfi A(13); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative; for EuroPOND Consortium.

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy. 
Electronic address: darchetti@fatebenefratelli.eu.
(2)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam UMC Location VUmc, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: s.ingala@vumc.nl.
(3)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Depts. of Medical Informatics & 
Radiology, Erasmus MC, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
v.venkatraghavan@erasmusmc.nl.
(4)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam UMC Location VUmc, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: v.wottschel@vumc.nl.
(5)Centre for Medical Image Computing, Department of Computer Science, UCL, 
London, UK. Electronic address: alexandra.young.11@ucl.ac.uk.
(6)Centre for Medical Image Computing, Department of Computer Science, UCL, 
London, UK. Electronic address: maura.bellio.16@ucl.ac.uk.
(7)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Depts. of Medical Informatics & 
Radiology, Erasmus MC, The Netherlands. Electronic address: e.bron@erasmusmc.nl.
(8)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Depts. of Medical Informatics & 
Radiology, Erasmus MC, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
s.klein@erasmusmc.nl.
(9)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam UMC Location VUmc, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Institutes of Neurology and Healthcare Engineering, 
UCL, London, UK. Electronic address: f.barkhof@vumc.nl.
(10)Centre for Medical Image Computing, Department of Computer Science, UCL, 
London, UK. Electronic address: d.alexander@ucl.ac.uk.
(11)Centre for Medical Image Computing, Department of Computer Science, UCL, 
London, UK. Electronic address: n.oxtoby@ucl.ac.uk.
(12)University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; IRCCS Istituto Centro San 
Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy. Electronic address: 
giovanni.frisoni@unige.ch.
(13)IRCCS Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy. 
Electronic address: aredolfi@fatebenefratelli.eu.

Understanding the sequence of biological and clinical events along the course of 
Alzheimer's disease provides insights into dementia pathophysiology and can help 
participant selection in clinical trials. Our objective is to train two 
data-driven computational models for sequencing these events, the Event Based 
Model (EBM) and discriminative-EBM (DEBM), on the basis of well-characterized 
research data, then validate the trained models on subjects from clinical 
cohorts characterized by less-structured data-acquisition protocols. Seven 
independent data cohorts were considered totalling 2389 cognitively normal (CN), 
1424 mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and 743 Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. 
The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) data set was used as 
training set for the constriction of disease models while a collection of 
multi-centric data cohorts was used as test set for validation. Cross-sectional 
information related to clinical, cognitive, imaging and cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) biomarkers was used. Event sequences obtained with EBM and DEBM showed 
differences in the ordering of single biomarkers but according to both the first 
biomarkers to become abnormal were those related to CSF, followed by cognitive 
scores, while structural imaging showed significant volumetric decreases at 
later stages of the disease progression. Staging of test set subjects based on 
sequences obtained with both models showed good linear correlation with the Mini 
Mental State Examination score (R2EBM = 0.866; R2DEBM = 0.906). In discriminant 
analyses, significant differences (p-value ≤ 0.05) between the staging of 
subjects from training and test sets were observed in both models. No 
significant difference between the staging of subjects from the training and 
test was observed (p-value > 0.05) when considering a subset composed by 562 
subjects for which all biomarker families (cognitive, imaging and CSF) are 
available. Event sequence obtained with DEBM recapitulates the heuristic models 
in a data-driven fashion and is clinically plausible. We demonstrated 
inter-cohort transferability of two disease progression models and their 
robustness in detecting AD phases. This is an important step towards the 
adoption of data-driven statistical models into clinical domain.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2019.101954
PMCID: PMC6675943
PMID: 31362149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Dec;20(12):8651-8660. doi: 10.1002/alz.14309. Epub 2024 
Oct 29.

A short version of the Everyday Cognition scale can predict clinical progression 
and cognitive decline.

Manjavong M(1), Diaz A(2)(3)(4), Ashford MT(2)(3)(4), Aaronson A(3)(4), Miller 
MJ(2)(3)(4), Kang JM(5), Mackin S(3)(4)(6), Tank R(7), Weiner M(2)(3)(4)(8)(9), 
Nosheny R(3)(4)(6); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatric Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(2)Northern California Institute for Research and Education (NCIRE), San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, VA Advanced Imaging Research 
Center, San Francisco, California, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Gil Medical Center, Gachon University College of 
Medicine, Incheon, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(7)Dementia Research Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, University College 
London, London, UK.
(8)Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Everyday Cognition scale (ECog-39) scores are associated with 
future cognitive decline. We investigated whether the 12-item ECog (ECog-12), 
which is being collected in Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)4, 
can predict progression.
METHODS: Baseline self (PT)- and study partner (SP)-ECog-12 data were extracted 
from the 39-item version collected in the ADNI. Weibull analysis examined the 
relationship between baseline ECog-12 and future clinical progression (change in 
Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes [CDR-SB] scores and diagnostic 
conversion).
RESULTS: Higher PT- and SP-ECog-12 scores were associated with faster CDR-SB 
worsening, with hazard ratios in cognitively unimpaired (CU) 3.34 and 9.61, mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) 1.44 and 2.82, and dementia 0.93 and 1.82. They were 
associated with conversion from CU to MCI 3.01 and 6.24 and MCI to dementia 1.61 
and 3.07.
DISCUSSION: SP-ECog-12 provided a higher prognostic value for predicting 
clinical progression, so this can help identify and monitor patients at risk in 
research and health-care settings.
HIGHLIGHTS: The 12-item Everyday Cognition scale (ECog-12) data obtained from 
both raters increased diagnostic conversion risk from cognitively unimpaired to 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and from MCI to dementia. ECog-12, rated by 
study partners, was associated with an increased risk of Clinical Dementia 
Rating Sum of Boxes worsening in all diagnostic groups. Our results provide 
novel information about the specific scoring outputs and rater types 
(participant vs. study partner) of ECog-12 that can facilitate screening, 
prioritization, and longitudinal monitoring of the clinical progression of 
participants in Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 4 and other 
Alzheimer's disease clinical studies, clinical trials, and in health-care 
settings.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14309
PMCID: PMC11667505
PMID: 39470161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Manchumad Manjavong has no conflicts of 
interest to declare. Adam Diaz has no conflicts of interest to declare. Dr. 
Miriam T. Ashford receives funding to her institution from NIH. Anna Aaronson 
has no conflicts of interest to declare. Dr. Melanie J. Miller has no conflicts 
of interest to declare. Dr. Jae Myeong Kang has no conflicts of interest to 
declare. Dr. R. Scott Mackin has received research support from The National 
Institute of Mental Health, the National Institute on Aging, and Johnson and 
Johnson, during the past 2 years. Dr. Rachana Tank has no conflicts of interest 
to declare. Dr. Weiner reports grants from National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
grants from Department of Defense (DOD), grants from Patient‐Centered Outcomes 
Research Institute (PCORI), grants from California Department of Public Health 
(CDPH), grants from University of Michigan, grants from Siemens, grants from 
Biogen, grants from Hillblom Foundation, grants from Alzheimer's Association, 
grants from The State of California, grants from Johnson & Johnson, grants from 
Kevin and Connie Shanahan, grants from GE, grants from VUmc, grants from 
Australian Catholic University (HBI‐BHR), grants from The Stroke Foundation, 
grants from Veterans Administration, personal fees from Acumen Pharmaceutical, 
personal fees from Cerecin, personal fees from Dolby Family Ventures, personal 
fees from Eli Lilly, personal fees from Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., personal fees 
from National Institute on Aging (NIA), personal fees from Nestle/Nestec, 
personal fees from PCORI/PPRN, personal fees from Roche, personal fees from 
University of Southern California (USC), personal fees from NervGen, personal 
fees from Baird Equity Capital, personal fees from BioClinica, personal fees 
from Cytox, personal fees from Duke University, personal fees from Eisai, 
personal fees from FUJIFILM‐Toyama Chemical (Japan), personal fees from Garfield 
Weston, personal fees from Genentech, personal fees from Guidepoint Global, 
personal fees from Indiana University, personal fees from Japanese Organization 
for Medical Device Development, Inc. (JOMDD), personal fees from Medscape, 
personal fees from Peerview Internal Medicine, personal fees from Roche, 
personal fees from T3D Therapeutics, personal fees from WebMD, personal fees 
from Vida Ventures, personal fees from The Buck Institute for Research on Aging, 
personal fees from China Association for Alzheimer's Disease (CAAD), personal 
fees from Japan Society for Dementia Research, personal fees from Korean 
Dementia Society, outside the submitted work; and holds stocks or options with 
Alzheon Inc., Alzeca, and Anven. Dr. Rachel L. Nosheny reports funding from the 
National Institutes of Health (grants to institution), California Department of 
Public Health (grants to institution), and Genentech Inc. (grants to 
institution). Author disclosures are available in the supporting information.


203. J Neuroinflammation. 2020 Mar 14;17(1):84. doi: 10.1186/s12974-020-01750-3.

A peripheral neutrophil-related inflammatory factor predicts a decline in 
executive function in mild Alzheimer's disease.

Bawa KK(1)(2), Krance SH(3), Herrmann N(2)(4), Cogo-Moreira H(5)(6), Ouk 
M(1)(2), Yu D(2), Wu CY(1)(2), Black SE(2)(7), Lanctôt KL(1)(2)(4), Swardfager 
W(8)(9); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Toronto, 1 King's 
College Circle, Toronto, ON, M5S 1A8, Canada.
(2)Hurvitz Brain Sciences Program, Sunnybrook Research Institute, 2075 Bayview 
Avenue, Toronto, ON, M4N 3M5, Canada.
(3)Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, Western University, 1151 Richmond 
St, London, ON, N6A 5C1, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, 250 
College Street, 8th floor, Toronto, ON, M5T 1R8, Canada.
(5)Departamento Psichiatria, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, 1, R. Borges 
Lagoa, 570-Vila Clementino, Sao Paulo, SP, 04038-000, Brazil.
(6)Department of Education and Psychology: Division of Methods and Evaluation, 
Freie Universität Berlin, Fabeckstraße 37 & 69; Habelschwerdter Allee 45, 14195, 
Berlin, Germany.
(7)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, 6 
Queen's Park Crescent West, Third Floor, Toronto, ON, M5S 3H2, Canada.
(8)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Toronto, 1 King's 
College Circle, Toronto, ON, M5S 1A8, Canada. w.swardfager@utoronto.ca.
(9)Hurvitz Brain Sciences Program, Sunnybrook Research Institute, 2075 Bayview 
Avenue, Toronto, ON, M4N 3M5, Canada. w.swardfager@utoronto.ca.

BACKGROUND: Studies suggest a role of the innate immune system, including the 
activity of neutrophils, in neurodegeneration related to Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), but prospective cognitive data remain lacking in humans. We aimed to 
investigate the predictive relationship between neutrophil-associated 
inflammatory proteins in peripheral blood and changes in memory and executive 
function over 1 year in patients with AD.
METHODS: Participants with AD were identified from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin 
(NGAL), myeloperoxidase (MPO), interleukin-8 (IL-8), macrophage inflammatory 
protein-1 beta (MIP-1β), and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) were assayed by luminex 
immunofluorescence multiplex assay at baseline. Confirmatory factor analysis was 
used to test an underlying neutrophil associated plasma inflammatory factor. 
Composite z-scores for memory and executive function were generated from 
multiple tests at baseline and at 1 year. A multiple linear regression model was 
used to investigate the association of the baseline inflammatory factor with 
changes in memory and executive function over 1 year.
RESULTS: Among AD patients (n = 109, age = 74.8 ± 8.1, 42% women, Mini Mental 
State Examination [MMSE] = 23.6 ± 1.9), the neutrophil-related inflammatory 
proteins NGAL (λ = 0.595, p < .001), MPO (λ = 0.575, p < .001), IL-8 (λ = 0.525, 
p < .001), MIP-1β (λ = 0.411, p = .008), and TNF (λ = 0.475, p < .001) were 
found to inform an underlying factor. Over 1 year, this inflammatory factor 
predicted a decline in executive function (β = - 0.152, p = 0.015) but not 
memory (β = 0.030, p = 0.577) in models controlling for demographics, brain 
atrophy, white matter hyperintensities, the ApoE ε4 allele, concomitant 
medications, and baseline cognitive performance.
CONCLUSIONS: An inflammatory factor constructed from five neutrophil-related 
markers in peripheral blood predicted a decline in executive function over 
1 year in people with mild AD.

DOI: 10.1186/s12974-020-01750-3
PMCID: PMC7071641
PMID: 32171317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


204. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Nov;20(11):7847-7858. doi: 10.1002/alz.14252. Epub 2024 
Sep 26.

Self-reported hearing loss is associated with faster cognitive and functional 
decline but not diagnostic conversion in the ADNI cohort.

Miller AA(1)(2), Sharp ES(1)(3), Wang S(4)(5), Zhao Y(4), Mecca AP(1)(2), van 
Dyck CH(1)(2)(3)(6), O'Dell RS(1)(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Research Unit, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Yale University School of Public Health, New 
Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(5)Department of Biostatistics and Health Data Science, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Hearing loss is identified as one of the largest modifiable risk 
factors for cognitive impairment and dementia. Studies evaluating this 
relationship have yielded mixed results.
METHODS: We investigated the longitudinal relationship between self-reported 
hearing loss and cognitive/functional performance in 695 cognitively normal (CN) 
and 941 participants with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) enrolled in the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.
RESULTS: Within CN participants with hearing loss, there was a significantly 
greater rate of cognitive decline per modified preclinical Alzheimer's cognitive 
composite. Within both CN and MCI participants with hearing loss, there was a 
significantly greater rate of functional decline per the functional activities 
questionnaire (FAQ). In CN and MCI participants, hearing loss did not 
significantly contribute to the risk of progression to a more impaired 
diagnosis.
DISCUSSION: These results confirm previous studies demonstrating a significant 
longitudinal association between self-reported hearing loss and 
cognition/function but do not demonstrate an increased risk of conversion to a 
more impaired diagnosis.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION INFORMATION: NCT00106899 (ADNI: Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative, clinicaltrials.gov), NCT01078636 (ADNI-GO: Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative Grand Opportunity, clinicaltrials.gov), 
NCT01231971 (ADNI2: Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2, 
clinicaltrials.gov), NCT02854033 (ADNI3: Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative 3, clinicaltrials.gov).
HIGHLIGHTS: Hearing loss is a potential modifiable risk factor for dementia. We 
assessed the effect of self-reported hearing loss on cognition and function in 
the ADNI cohort. Hearing loss contributes to significantly faster cognitive and 
functional decline. Hearing loss was not associated with conversion to a more 
impaired diagnosis.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14252
PMCID: PMC11567835
PMID: 39324520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R.S.O. reports grants for clinical trials from 
Cognition Therapeutics and Bristol‐Myers Squibb outside of the submitted work. 
A.P.M. reports grants for clinical trials from Genentech, Eli Lilly, and Janssen 
Pharmaceuticals outside the submitted work. C.H.v.D. reports grants for clinical 
trials from Biogen, Novartis, Eli Lilly, Merck, Eisai, Janssen, Roche, 
Genentech, Toyama, and Biohaven outside the submitted work. A.P.M., E.S.S., 
Y.Z., and C.H.v.D. report grant support from the NIH for work not related to 
this manuscript. C.H.v.D. reports consulting fees from Kyowa Kirin, Roche, 
Merck, Eli Lilly, and Janssen. A.P.M. received honoraria for presentations at 
University of Connecticut and Stanford University. R.S.O. received honoraria for 
presentations at University of Kansas. A.P.M. received support from ACTC/ATRI 
for travel to ACTC/ATRI meetings. A.P.M. is a member of the ISTAART Neuroimaging 
PIA executive committee. A.A.M. and S.W. have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose. Author disclosures are available in the Supporting Information.


205. Neuroinformatics. 2020 Oct;18(4):531-548. doi: 10.1007/s12021-020-09459-7.

Computing Univariate Neurodegenerative Biomarkers with Volumetric Optimal 
Transportation: A Pilot Study.

Tu Y(1), Mi L(1), Zhang W(1), Zhang H(1), Zhang J(2), Fan Y(1), Goradia D(3), 
Chen K(3), Caselli RJ(4), Reiman EM(3), Gu X(2), Wang Y(5); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona 
State University, P.O. Box 878809, Tempe, AZ, 85287, USA.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA.
(3)Banner Alzheimer's Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.
(5)School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona 
State University, P.O. Box 878809, Tempe, AZ, 85287, USA. ylwang@asu.edu.

Changes in cognitive performance due to neurodegenerative diseases such as 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) are closely correlated to the brain structure 
alteration. A univariate and personalized neurodegenerative biomarker with 
strong statistical power based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) will benefit 
clinical diagnosis and prognosis of neurodegenerative diseases. However, few 
biomarkers of this type have been developed, especially those that are robust to 
image noise and applicable to clinical analyses. In this paper, we introduce a 
variational framework to compute optimal transportation (OT) on brain structural 
MRI volumes and develop a univariate neuroimaging index based on OT to quantify 
neurodegenerative alterations. Specifically, we compute the OT from each image 
to a template and measure the Wasserstein distance between them. The obtained 
Wasserstein distance, Wasserstein Index (WI) for short to specify the distance 
to a template, is concise, informative and robust to random noise. Comparing to 
the popular linear programming-based OT computation method, our framework makes 
use of Newton's method, which makes it possible to compute WI in large-scale 
datasets. Experimental results, on 314 subjects (140 Aβ + AD and 174 Aβ- normal 
controls) from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) baseline 
dataset, provide preliminary evidence that the proposed WI is correlated with a 
clinical cognitive measure (the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score), and 
it is able to identify group difference and achieve a good classification 
accuracy, outperforming two other popular univariate indices including 
hippocampal volume and entorhinal cortex thickness. The current pilot work 
suggests the application of WI as a potential univariate neurodegenerative 
biomarker.

DOI: 10.1007/s12021-020-09459-7
PMCID: PMC7502473
PMID: 32253701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Neuroimage Clin. 2014 Jan 4;4:461-72. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2013.12.012. 
eCollection 2014.

ApoE4 effects on automated diagnostic classifiers for mild cognitive impairment 
and Alzheimer's disease.

Apostolova LG(1), Hwang KS(1), Kohannim O(2), Avila D(1), Elashoff D(3), Jack CR 
Jr(4), Shaw L(5), Trojanowski JQ(5), Weiner MW(6), Thompson PM(2); Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(2)Imaging genetics Center, Institute for Neuroimaging and Informatics, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine Statistics Core, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Department of Radiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA ; 
Department of Veteran's Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Biomarkers are the only feasible way to detect and monitor presymptomatic 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). No single biomarker can predict future cognitive 
decline with an acceptable level of accuracy. In addition to designing powerful 
multimodal diagnostic platforms, a careful investigation of the major sources of 
disease heterogeneity and their influence on biomarker changes is needed. Here 
we investigated the accuracy of a novel multimodal biomarker classifier for 
differentiating cognitively normal (NC), mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD 
subjects with and without stratification by ApoE4 genotype. 111 NC, 182 MCI and 
95 AD ADNI participants provided both structural MRI and CSF data at baseline. 
We used an automated machine-learning classifier to test the ability of 
hippocampal volume and CSF Aβ, t-tau and p-tau levels, both separately and in 
combination, to differentiate NC, MCI and AD subjects, and predict conversion. 
We hypothesized that the combined hippocampal/CSF biomarker classifier model 
would achieve the highest accuracy in differentiating between the three 
diagnostic groups and that ApoE4 genotype will affect both diagnostic accuracy 
and biomarker selection. The combined hippocampal/CSF classifier performed 
better than hippocampus-only classifier in differentiating NC from MCI and NC 
from AD. It also outperformed the CSF-only classifier in differentiating NC vs. 
AD. Our amyloid marker played a role in discriminating NC from MCI or AD but not 
for MCI vs. AD. Neurodegenerative markers contributed to accurate discrimination 
of AD from NC and MCI but not NC from MCI. Classifiers predicting MCI conversion 
performed well only after ApoE4 stratification. Hippocampal volume and sex 
achieved AUC = 0.68 for predicting conversion in the ApoE4-positive MCI, while 
CSF p-tau, education and sex achieved AUC = 0.89 for predicting conversion in 
ApoE4-negative MCI. These observations support the proposed biomarker trajectory 
in AD, which postulates that amyloid markers become abnormal early in the 
disease course while markers of neurodegeneration become abnormal later in the 
disease course and suggests that ApoE4 could be at least partially responsible 
for some of the observed disease heterogeneity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2013.12.012
PMCID: PMC3952354
PMID: 24634832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Front Aging Neurosci. 2024 Jul 16;16:1339163. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1339163. 
eCollection 2024.

Association of modified dementia risk score with cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers 
and cognition in adults without dementia.

Li QY(#)(1), Fu Y(#)(1), Cui XJ(2), Wang ZT(1)(3), Tan L(1)(3); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(2)Department of Outpatient, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Hospital, University of Health and 
Rehabilitation Sciences (Qingdao Municipal Hospital), Qingdao, China.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: This study aimed to investigate the cognitive profile and 
prospective cognitive changes in non-demented adults with elevated Modified 
Dementia Risk Scores (MDRS), while also exploring the potential relationship 
between these associations and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology and neuroinflammation.
METHODS: Within the Chinese Alzheimer's Biomarker and LifestylE (CABLE) 
database, 994 participants without dementia were assessed on MDRS, CSF 
biomarkers and cognition. We examined the associations of the MDRS with CSF 
biomarkers and cognitive scores using linear regressions. Causal mediation 
analyses were conducted to analyze the associations among MDRS, brain 
pathologies, and cognition. The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) study was used to validate the mediation effects and to investigate the 
longitudinal association between MDRS and cognitive decline.
RESULTS: The results revealed that higher MDRS were linked to poorer cognitive 
performance (Model 1: PFDR  < 0.001; Model 2: PFDR  < 0.001) and increases in 
CSF levels of phosphorylated tau (P-tau, Model 1: PFDR  < 0.001; Model 2: PFDR 
 < 0.001), total tau (T-tau, Model 1: PFDR  < 0.001; Model 2: PFDR  < 0.001), 
P-tau/Aβ42 ratio (Model 1: PFDR  = 0.023; Model 2: PFDR  = 0.028), T-tau/Aβ42 
ratio (Model 1: PFDR  < 0.001; Model 2: PFDR  < 0.001) and soluble triggering 
receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (sTrem2, Model 1: PFDR  < 0.001; Model 2: 
PFDR  < 0.001) in the CABLE study. The impact of MDRS on cognition was partially 
mediated by neuroinflammation and tau pathology. These mediation effects were 
replicated in the ADNI study. Baseline MDRS were significantly associated with 
future cognitive decline, as indicated by lower scores on the Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE, Model 1: PFDR  = 0.045; Model 2: PFDR  < 0.001), ADNI 
composite memory score (ADNI-MEM, Model 1: PFDR  = 0.005; Model 2: PFDR 
 < 0.001), ADNI composite executive function score (ADNI-EF, Model 1: PFDR 
 = 0.045; Model 2: PFDR  < 0.001), and higher score on the Alzheimer's Disease 
Assessment Scale (ADAS13, Model 1: PFDR  = 0.045; Model 2: PFDR  < 0.001).
DISCUSSION: The findings of this study revealed significant associations between 
MDRS and cognitive decline, suggesting a potential role of tau pathology and 
neuroinflammation in the link between MDRS and poorer cognitive performance in 
individuals without dementia. Consequently, the MDRS holds promise as a tool for 
targeted preventive interventions in individuals at high risk of cognitive 
impairment.

Copyright © 2024 Li, Fu, Cui, Wang and Tan.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1339163
PMCID: PMC11286572
PMID: 39081396

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


208. Neurology. 2020 Sep 15;95(11):e1538-e1553. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000010256. 
Epub 2020 Jul 16.

Multitracer model for staging cortical amyloid deposition using PET imaging.

Collij LE(1), Heeman F(1), Salvadó G(1), Ingala S(1), Altomare D(1), de Wilde 
A(1), Konijnenberg E(1), van Buchem M(1), Yaqub M(1), Markiewicz P(1), Golla 
SSV(1), Wottschel V(1), Wink AM(1), Visser PJ(1), Teunissen CE(1), Lammertsma 
AA(1), Scheltens P(1), van der Flier WM(1), Boellaard R(1), van Berckel BNM(1), 
Molinuevo JL(1), Gispert JD(1), Schmidt ME(1), Barkhof F(1), Lopes Alves I(2); 
ALFA Study, for the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; AMYPAD 
Consortium.

Collaborators: Arenaza-Urquijo EM, Beteta A, Brugulat-Serrat A, Cacciaglia R, 
Boccagni AC, Bodien YG, Crous-Bou M, Deulofeu C, Dominguez R, Fauria K, Falcon 
C, Félez-Sánchez M, González de Echavarri JM, Grau-Rivera O, Hernández L, Huesa 
G, Huguet J, LeÓn M, Marne P, Menchón T, Milà-Alomà M, Operto G, Minguillon C, 
Pascual M, Polo A, Pradas S, Sala-Vila A, Sánchez-Benavides G, Shekari M, 
Soteras A, Suárez-Calvet M, Tenas L, Vilanova M, Vilor-Tejedor N, Barkhof F, 
Farrar G, Diaz C, Pla S, Gispert JD, Buckley C, Frisoni GB, Stephens A, 
Molinuevo JL, Ford L, Schmidt M, Lopes Alves I, Georges J, Mett A, Richard E, 
Scheltens P, Visser PJ, van Berckel BN, Berkhof H, Meije Wink A, Yaqub M, 
Leeuwis A, van Maurik I, Collij L, Heeman F, Iidow I, Garibotto V, Altomare D, 
Moro C, Ritchie C, Muniz Terrera G, Wimberley C, Thompson G, Waldman A, Payoux 
P, Vellas B, Delrieu J, Saint-Aubert L, Hitzel A, Julian A, Rivera OG, Salvadó 
Blasco G, Shekari M, Knezevic I, Perissinotti A, Nordberg A, Kivipelto M, 
Rodriguez-Vieitez E, Savitcheva I, Drzezga A, Jessen F, Dietlein M, Kobe C, 
Schmidt M, Walker Z, Markiewicz P, Jiao J, Win Z, Gismondi R, Banton N, Bullich 
S, Manyakov N, Kaliukhovich D, Wolz R, Woodside J, Gray K, Birck C, Milne R, 
Smedinga M.

Author information:
(1)From Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine (L.E.C., F.H., S.I., M.Y., 
S.S.V.G., V.W., A.M.W., A.A.L., R.B., B.N.M.v.B., F.B., I.L.A.), Neurochemistry 
Laboratory (C.E.T.), Alzheimer Center (D.A., A.d.W., E.K., M.v.B., P.J.V., P.S., 
W.M.v.d.F.), and Department of Neurology (D.A., A.d.W., E.K., M.v.B., P.J.V., 
P.S., W.M.v.d.F.), Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Netherlands; 
Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center (BBRC), Pasqual Maragall Foundation (G.S., 
J.L.M., J.D.G.), Barcelona; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de 
Bioingeniería, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina (J.D.G.); Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red de Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable (J.L.M.), Madrid; IMIM 
(Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute) (G.S., J.L.M., J.D.G.), Barcelona; 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra (J.L.M., J.D.G.), Barcelona, Spain; Laboratory of 
Neuroimaging of Aging (D.A.), University of Geneva; Memory Clinic (D.A.), 
University Hospital of Geneva, Switzerland; Centre for Medical Image Computing 
(P.M., F.B.), Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, University College 
London, London, UK; and Janssen Pharmaceutica NV (M.E.S.), Beerse, Belgium.
(2)From Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine (L.E.C., F.H., S.I., M.Y., 
S.S.V.G., V.W., A.M.W., A.A.L., R.B., B.N.M.v.B., F.B., I.L.A.), Neurochemistry 
Laboratory (C.E.T.), Alzheimer Center (D.A., A.d.W., E.K., M.v.B., P.J.V., P.S., 
W.M.v.d.F.), and Department of Neurology (D.A., A.d.W., E.K., M.v.B., P.J.V., 
P.S., W.M.v.d.F.), Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Netherlands; 
Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center (BBRC), Pasqual Maragall Foundation (G.S., 
J.L.M., J.D.G.), Barcelona; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de 
Bioingeniería, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina (J.D.G.); Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red de Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable (J.L.M.), Madrid; IMIM 
(Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute) (G.S., J.L.M., J.D.G.), Barcelona; 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra (J.L.M., J.D.G.), Barcelona, Spain; Laboratory of 
Neuroimaging of Aging (D.A.), University of Geneva; Memory Clinic (D.A.), 
University Hospital of Geneva, Switzerland; Centre for Medical Image Computing 
(P.M., F.B.), Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, University College 
London, London, UK; and Janssen Pharmaceutica NV (M.E.S.), Beerse, Belgium. 
i.lopesalves@amsterdamumc.nl.

OBJECTIVE: To develop and evaluate a model for staging cortical amyloid 
deposition using PET with high generalizability.
METHODS: Three thousand twenty-seven individuals (1,763 cognitively unimpaired 
[CU], 658 impaired, 467 with Alzheimer disease [AD] dementia, 111 with non-AD 
dementia, and 28 with missing diagnosis) from 6 cohorts (European Medical 
Information Framework for AD, Alzheimer's and Family, Alzheimer's Biomarkers in 
Daily Practice, Amsterdam Dementia Cohort, Open Access Series of Imaging Studies 
[OASIS]-3, Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative [ADNI]) who underwent 
amyloid PET were retrospectively included; 1,049 individuals had follow-up 
scans. With application of dataset-specific cutoffs to global standard uptake 
value ratio (SUVr) values from 27 regions, single-tracer and pooled multitracer 
regional rankings were constructed from the frequency of abnormality across 400 
CU individuals (100 per tracer). The pooled multitracer ranking was used to 
create a staging model consisting of 4 clusters of regions because it displayed 
a high and consistent correlation with each single-tracer ranking. Relationships 
between amyloid stage, clinical variables, and longitudinal cognitive decline 
were investigated.
RESULTS: SUVr abnormality was most frequently observed in cingulate, followed by 
orbitofrontal, precuneal, and insular cortices and then the associative, 
temporal, and occipital regions. Abnormal amyloid levels based on binary global 
SUVr classification were observed in 1.0%, 5.5%, 17.9%, 90.0%, and 100.0% of 
individuals in stage 0 to 4, respectively. Baseline stage predicted decline in 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score (ADNI: n = 867, F = 67.37, p < 0.001; 
OASIS: n = 475, F = 9.12, p < 0.001) and faster progression toward an MMSE score 
≤25 (ADNI: n = 787, hazard ratio [HR]stage1 2.00, HRstage2 3.53, HRstage3 4.55, 
HRstage4 9.91, p < 0.001; OASIS: n = 469, HRstage4 4.80, p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The pooled multitracer staging model successfully classified the 
level of amyloid burden in >3,000 individuals across cohorts and radiotracers 
and detects preglobal amyloid burden and distinct risk profiles of cognitive 
decline within globally amyloid-positive individuals.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000010256
PMCID: PMC7713745
PMID: 32675080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Front Aging Neurosci. 2018 Jun 4;10:166. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00166. 
eCollection 2018.

Gender Differences in Elderly With Subjective Cognitive Decline.

Wang L(1)(2)(3), Tian T(4); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(4)Department of Neurology, The Second Hospital, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 
China.

Objective: Subjective cognitive decline (SCD), also known as significant memory 
concern (SMC), has been suggested as a manifestation of Alzheimer's Disease (AD) 
preceding mild cognitive impairment (MCI). This study assessed the impact of 
gender on cognition, amyloid accumulation, the volumes of hippocampus, 
entorhinal cortex (EC), fusiform and medial temporal lobe (MTA) and 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pathology biomarkers in patients reporting SMC. 
Methods: Twenty-nine males (mean age ± SD: 72.3 ± 5.7 years) and 40 females 
(mean age ± SD: 71.0 ± 5.1 years) with SMC from the AD Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) were included in the study. We explored the gender discrepancies in 
cognition, [18F] AV45 amyloid positivity, volumes of hippocampus, EC, fusiform 
and MTA and CSF biomarkers. Results: Compared with females, males showed 
significantly worse performance in Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale 13 
(ADAS-13; P = 0.004) and lower amyloid deposition (P < 0.001). However, females 
showed greater advantage on the task of Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test-5 
(RAVLT-5) sum (P = 0.021), RAVLT-immediate recall (P = 0.010) and reduced 
volumes of the hippocampus, EC, fusiform and MTA (P = 0.001, P < 0.001, P < 
0.001, P = 0.007) than males. No gender differences were found in CSF Aβ42, CSF 
Tau and CSF P-tau (P = 0.264, P = 0.454, P = 0.353). Conclusions: These findings 
highlight that gender discrepancies should be considered in the interpretation 
of cognitive measures when evaluating SMC.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00166
PMCID: PMC5994539
PMID: 29915534


210. Brain Imaging Behav. 2012 Dec;6(4):502-16. doi: 10.1007/s11682-012-9186-z.

Development and assessment of a composite score for memory in the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Crane PK(1), Carle A, Gibbons LE, Insel P, Mackin RS, Gross A, Jones RN, 
Mukherjee S, Curtis SM, Harvey D, Weiner M, Mungas D; Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner M, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Liu 
E, Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, Gamst A, Thomas RG, Donohue M, 
Walter S, Gessert D, Sather T, Beckett L, Harvey D, Gamst A, Donohue M, Kornak 
J, Jack CR Jr, Dale A, Bernstein M, Felmlee J, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, 
Alexander G, DeCarli C, Jagust W, Bandy D, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen 
K, Mathis C, Morris J, Cairns NJ, Taylor-Reinwald L, Trojanowki JQ, Shaw L, Lee 
VM, Korecka M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen 
L, Kachaturian Z, Frank R, Snyder PJ, Molchan S, Kaye J, Quinn J, Lind B, Dolen 
S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Heidebrink JL, 
Lord JL, Petersen R, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Chowdhury M, Stern 
Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Morris JC, Ances B, Carroll M, Leon S, Mintun MA, 
Schneider S, Marson D, Griffith R, Clark D, Grossman H, Mitsis E, Romirowsky A, 
deToledo-Morrell L, Shah RC, Duara R, Varon D, Roberts P, Albert M, Onyike C, 
Kielb S, Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, Glodzik L, De Santi S, Doraiswamy P, Petrella 
JR, Coleman R, Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk D, Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, 
Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein BS, Martin K, Makino 
KM, Ismail M, Brand C, Mulnard RA, Thai G, Mc-Adams-Ortiz C, Womack K, Mathews 
D, Quiceno M, Diaz-Arrastia R, King R, Weiner M, Martin-Cook K, DeVous M, Levey 
AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Anderson HS, Swerdlow RH, Apostolova L, Lu PH, 
Bartzokis G, Silverman DH, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Johnson H, Farlow MR, 
Hake AM, Matthews BR, Herring S, van Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Chertkow H, 
Bergman H, Hosein C, Black S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GY, Feldman H, 
Mudge B, Assaly M, Kertesz A, Rogers J, Trost D, Bernick C, Munic D, Kerwin D, 
Mesulam MM, Lipowski K, Wu CK, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, 
Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall G, Frey M, 
Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh M, Belden C, 
Jacobson S, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, Obisesan TO, 
Wolday S, Bwayo SK, Lerner A, Hudson L, Ogrocki P, Fletcher E, Carmichael O, 
Olichney J, DeCarli C, Kittur S, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana 
S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, Tariot P, Fleisher A, Reeder S, 
Bates V, Capote H, Rainka M, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, 
Brown AD, Pearlson GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Saykin AJ, Santulli RB, Schwartz ES, 
Sink KM, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Querfurth H, Tremont G, 
Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Mintzer J, Flynn Longmire 
C, Spicer K, Finger E, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, Drost D.

Author information:
(1)Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington, Box 359780, 325 Ninth 
Avenue, Seattle, WA 98104, USA. pcrane@u.washington.edu

We sought to develop and evaluate a composite memory score from the 
neuropsychological battery used in the Alzheimer's Disease (AD) Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI). We used modern psychometric approaches to analyze 
longitudinal Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT, 2 versions), AD 
Assessment Schedule - Cognition (ADAS-Cog, 3 versions), Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE), and Logical Memory data to develop ADNI-Mem, a composite 
memory score. We compared RAVLT and ADAS-Cog versions, and compared ADNI-Mem to 
RAVLT recall sum scores, four ADAS-Cog-derived scores, the MMSE, and the 
Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes. We evaluated rates of decline in normal 
cognition, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and AD, ability to predict 
conversion from MCI to AD, strength of association with selected imaging 
parameters, and ability to differentiate rates of decline between participants 
with and without AD cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) signatures. The second version of 
the RAVLT was harder than the first. The ADAS-Cog versions were of similar 
difficulty. ADNI-Mem was slightly better at detecting change than total RAVLT 
recall scores. It was as good as or better than all of the other scores at 
predicting conversion from MCI to AD. It was associated with all our selected 
imaging parameters for people with MCI and AD. Participants with MCI with an AD 
CSF signature had somewhat more rapid decline than did those without. This paper 
illustrates appropriate methods for addressing the different versions of word 
lists, and demonstrates the additional power to be gleaned with a 
psychometrically sound composite memory score.

DOI: 10.1007/s11682-012-9186-z
PMCID: PMC3806057
PMID: 22782295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Jul;33(7):1486.e9-15. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.02.008. Epub 2011 Apr 3.

Using CSF biomarkers to replicate genetic associations in Alzheimer's disease.

Schott JM(1); ADNI Investigators.

Collaborators: Abdi H, Abdul Hadi N, Abdulkadir A, Abdullah A, Achuthan A, 
Adluru N, Aggarwal N, Aghajanian J, Agyemang A, Ahdidan J, Ahmad D, Ahmed F, 
Ahmed S, Ahmed F, Akbarifar R, Akhondi-Asl A, Aksu Y, Alcauter S, Alexander D, 
Alin A, Alshuft H, Alvarez-Linera J, Amin-Mansour A, Anderson J, Anderson D, 
Andorn A, Andrews KA, Ang A, Angersbach S, Ansarian R, Abhishek AM, Appannah A, 
Arfanakis K, Arif M, Armentrout S, Arrighi M, Arumughababu SV, Arunagiri V, 
Ashe-McNalley C, Ashford W, Le Page A, Avants B, Aviv R, Avula R, Ayache N, 
Ayan-Oshodi M, Ayhan M, Sumana BV, Bach Cuadra M, Bagepally B, Bahar Fuchs A, 
Baird G, Baker S, Baker J, Bakker A, Baladandayuthapani V, Barbash S, Barillot 
C, Barker W, Bartlett J, Bartley M, Baruchin A, Battaglini I, Bauer C, Bayley P, 
Becker J, Beckett L, Bednar M, Bedner A, Beg MF, Bekris L, Belaroussi B, Belloch 
V, Belmokhtar N, Ben Ahmed O, Bender JD, Bendib MM, Benois-Pineau J, 
Bhagchandani S, Bienkowska K, Biffi A, Bilgin G, Billing B, Bishop C, Bittner D, 
Björnsdotter M, Black S, Bloss C, Blunck Y, Bocti C, Bohorquez A, Bokde A, Boone 
J, Boord P, Boot B, Borrie M, Boudousq V, Bourgeat P, Bouttout H, Bowman D, 
Bowman G, Boxer A, Bozoki A, Bracard S, Braskie M, Breitner J, Bresell A, Brewer 
J, Brickhouse M, Brickman A, Britschgi M, Broadbent S, Brock B, Brown M, 
Buchsbaum M, Buerger K, Bunce D, Burnham S, Burns J, Burzykowski T, Butler T, 
Cabeza R, Cabral G, Caffery T, Cai Z, Callhoff J, Calvini P, Campbell N, 
Carbotti A, Carle A, Carmasin J, Carmasin J, Carpenter J, Carvalho J, Casanova 
R, Casey A, Cash D, Cash D, Cataldo R, Cella M, Chadaga A, Chakravarty M, Chang 
I, Chao L, Chaovalitwongse WA, Charil A, Chatterjee S, Che-Wei C, Chen K, Chen 
G, Chen S, Chen R, Chen IJ, Chen JT, Chen C, Chen J, Chen Q, Chen H, Cheng WC, 
Cheng X, Cheng B, Cherkas Y, Chertkow H, Chiang G, Chiao P, chibane MB, Chida N, 
Chin S, Ching C, Chisholm J, Cho SS, Cho C, Choe J, Choubey S, Chowbina S, 
Ciocia G, Clark D, Clarkson M, Clerc S, Climer S, Clunie D, Coen M, Coimbra A, 
Compton D, Conover J, Coubard O, Coulin S, Coulson E, Cover KS, Crans G, 
Crawford K, Croop R, Crum W, Cui Y, Da L, Dai Y, Daiello L, Daiello L, Darkner 
S, Darnell R, Davatzikos C, DavidPrakash B, Davidson C, Davis M, de Bruijne M, 
DeCarli C, Decker S, DeDuck K, Dehghan H, Della Rosa PA, DeOrchis V, Dépy Carron 
D, Desikan R, Desjardins B, deToledo-Morrell L, Devanand D, Devanarayan V, 
Devier D, Devous M, Di X, Di J, Diaz-Arrastia R, Diciotti S, Dickerson B, Dickie 
DA, Dickinson P, Dill V, Ding X, Dinov I, Dobosh B, Dobson H, Dodge H, Dolman A, 
Dolmo BC, Dong W, Donohue M, Dore V, Dorflinger E, Dowling M, Dowling M, 
Dragicevic N, Dricot L, Duchesne S, Duff K, Dukart J, Durazzo T, Dutta J, DWors 
R, Egefjord L, Elcoroaristizabal X, Emahazion T, Emahazion T, Endres C, Epstein 
N, Ereshefsky L, Eskildsen S, Espinosa A, Esposito M, Ewers M, Ewers M, Falcone 
G, Fan J, Fan Y, Fan Z, Fang Z, Farahibozorg S, Farahmandpoor Z, Farb N, Fardo 
D, Farias S, Farnum M, Farrer L, Fatke B, Faux N, Favilla S, Fazlollahi A, 
Feldman B, Félix Z, Fennema-Notestine C, Fernandes M, Fernandez S, Fernandez E, 
Ferrari R, Ferrer E, Fetterman B, Figurski M, Fillit H, Finch S, Finger E, Fiot 
JB, Flenniken D, Fletcher E, Flores C, Flynn Longmire C, Focke N, Forsythe A, 
Fox A, Fox A, Foxhall S, Franko E, Frederick B, Freeman R, Freire R, Friedrich 
CM, Friesenhahn M, Frisoni G, Fritzsche K, Fujiwara K, Fullerton T, Gaffour Y, 
Galbraith S, Galvin B, Gamst A, Gan K, Gao S, Garcia G, Garg G, Gaser C, 
Gastineau E, Gattaz W, Gaubert M, Gaudreau A, Gauthier S, Gavidia G, Gemme G, 
Geraci J, Gholipour F, Ghosh S, Ghosh D, Gieschke R, Gill R, Gillespie W, 
Gispert JD, Gitelman D, Gkontra X, Gleason C, Glymour MM, Godbey M, Gold B, 
Goldberg T, Goldman J, Gomar J, Gonzalez-Beltran A, Gore C, Gorriz JM, Goto M, 
Gou JI, Gradkowski W, Grasela T, Gray K, Gregory E, Greicius M, Grill J, 
Grolmusz V, Gross A, Gross A, Grydeland H, Guignot I, Guillaume B, Guilloux F, 
Guo LH, Guo H, Gupta V, Gurney G, Guyot J, Haas M, Habeck C, Habte F, Haight T, 
Hajaj C, Hajiesmaeili M, Hajjar I, Hammarstrom P, Han Z, Han D, Hanna Y, 
Hanna-Pladdy B, Hao Y, Hardy P, Harrison J, Harvey D, Harvey D, Hassanzadeh O, 
Hayashi T, Haynes JD, He Y, He H, Head D, Heckemann R, Heegaard N, Heidarieh SM, 
Heidebrink J, Hellyer P, Helwig M, Henderson D, Herholz K, Hess C, Hill S, 
Hisaka A, Ho Ming AY, Hobart J, Hochstetler H, Hofer S, Hoffman J, Holder D, 
Hollingworth P, Holmes R, Hong L, Hong H, Hong Q, Honigberg L, Hoogenraad F, 
Hope T, Hot T, Hsieh H, Hsu A, Hu M, Hu W, Hu X, Hu C, Hua WY, Huang X, Huang 
CJ, Huang Y, Huang J, Huang Z, Huentelman M, Huppertz HJ, Hurt S, Hussain M, 
Hutchins J, Hwang S, Hyun J, Ifeachor E, Iglesias M, Ikari Y, Ikonomidou V, Iman 
A, Imani F, Inlow M, Inoue L, Insel P, Irizarry M, Ishibashi T, Ishii K, Ito K, 
Iwatsubo T, Jacks A, Jacobson M, Jacqmin P, Jaeger M, Jaeger P, Jagger R, Jagust 
W, Janousova E, Jara H, Jedynak B, Jefferson A, Jenq J, Jiang T, Jiang C, Jiao 
Y, Jiaolong Q, Jin K, Johnson S, Johnson J, Johnson K, Jones R, Jones G, Jones 
M, Joshi R, Joshi S, Joshi A, Jouvent E, Juengling F, Jung W, Junjie Z, Muthamma 
KG, Kabilan M, Kairui Z, Kaludov N, Kam HJ, Kamakura V, Kamer A, Kanakaraj S, 
Kanchev V, Kaneko T, Kaneta T, Kang JH, Kang H, Kang J, Karantzoulis S, Katz I, 
Kaushik SS, Kauwe J, Kauwe J, Kawashima S, Kaye E, Kazemi S, Ke H, Kelleher T, 
Kennedy R, Keogh B, Kerchner G, Kerr D, Keshava N, Khalil A, Khondker Z, 
Khondker Z, Kiddle S, Kihara T, Killeen N, Killiany R, Kim JH, Kim JH, Kim D, 
Kim D, Kimberg D, King R, Kingery L, Kirby J, Kirsch W, Klein G, Klimas M, Kline 
R, Klopfenstein E, Koen J, Koenig L, Koikkalainen J, Kokomoor A, Kong X, Kong X, 
Koppel J, Korolev I, Kotamarti RM, Krahnke T, Krams M, Kraybill M, Kuceyeski A, 
Kuceyeski A, Kumar V, Kumar Roy P, Kuo J, Kyrtsos CR, Labib V, Labrish C, Lai S, 
Lakatos A, Lalonde F, Lam SC, Landau S, Lane B, Langbaum J, Langford D, Lanius 
V, Lasch S, Latella M, Lau H, Leatherday C, Lebedev A, Lee S, Lee Ja, Lee D, Lee 
G, Legal S, Lei H, Lemaitre H, Lenfant P, Leonards U, Leong J, Leoutsakos JM, 
Leung YY, Leung K, Levey A, Li M, Li L, Li J, Li Y, Li M, Li J, Li Y, Li Y, Li 
J, Li W, Li X, Li R, Li Q, Liang K, Liang P, Liao S, Liao W, Liaquat S, Liaw C, 
Liberman G, Lilley P, Lim JS, Lin F, Lin X, Linninger A, Liu S, Liu X, Liu G, 
Liu Y, Liu Y, Liu T, Liu L, Liu M, Liu T, Liu W, Liu C, Liu T, Liu Y, Liu X, Liu 
T, Liu H, Liu D, Liu X, Liu Y, Llido J, Lo R, Lobach I, Lobanov V, Lockhart A, 
Long X, Long Z, Long M, Looi J, Lu Y, Lu PH, Lu H, Lucena N, Luis J, Lukas C, 
Lukic A, Luo X, Luo S, Luo L, Luo W, Luo X, Ma SL, Ma SM, Mackin S, Mada M, 
Madabhushi A, Madeira S, Magland J, Mahanta MS, Maikusa N, Maldjian J, Malpas C, 
Mandal I, Mandal P, Mang A, Mangin JF, Manjon J, Mantri N, Manzour A, Marcus D, 
Margolin R, Marrett S, Marshall G, Martinez Gonzalez A, Martinez Torteya A, 
Martins R, Mather M, Mathis C, Matoug S, Mattei P, Matthews D, Mattis P, 
McCarroll S, McConathy J, McDonald C, McEvoy L, McGeown W, McGinnis S, McGonigle 
J, Randal McIntosh A, McIntyre J, McLaren D, McMillan C, McQuail J, Meadowcroft 
M, Meda S, Melie-Garcia L, Melrose R, Mendelson A, Mendez M, Menendez E, Meng M, 
Meng M, Meredith J, Meyer M, Meyer C, Mez J, Mickael G, Mikula M, Miller M, 
Millikin C, Mintun M, Mitchell M, Mitsis E, Mon A, Moore D, Morabito FC, Birgani 
PM, Moratal D, Morimoto B, Morris J, Morris J, Mortamet B, Moscato P, 
Mourao-Miranda J, Mueller S, Mueller K, Mukherjee S, Mukund N, Mulder E, Mungas 
D, Munir K, Murayama S, Murphy K, Sairam N, Nagata K, Nair A, Narayana P, 
Nasrabadi S, Nativio R, Nazeri A, Nejad L, Nekooei S, Nemeth I, Nencka A, 
Nettiksimmons J, Neu S, Ng YB, Nguyen N, Nguyen H, Nichols T, Niecko T, Nielsen 
C, Niethammer M, Nishio T, Noda A, Nordstrom M, Noshad S, Notomi K, Novak N, 
Nutakki GC, O'Charoen S, Obisesan T, Oh J, Okonkwo O, Rikkert MO, Oliveira J, 
Oliveira A, Oliver R, Olmos S, Oltra J, Ong R, Osadebey M, Osadebey M, 
Ostrowitzki S, Ovando Vazquez CM, Overholser R, Anishiya P, Chitra PK, Pa J, Pa 
J, Palanisamy P, Pan S, Pan G, Pan Z, Pande Y, Pardo J, Pardoe H, Park H, Park 
L, Park J, Park S, Parker C, Patel Y, Patil M, Patil A, Pawlak M, Payoux P, 
Pennec X, Pereira F, Perlbarg V, Perneczky R, Peters F, Petitti D, Petrella J, 
Petrou M, Peyrat JM, Pham Ngoc PT, Phillips J, Phillips N, Pian WT, Pierson R, 
Piovezan M, Pipitone J, Pirraglia E, Planes X, Podhorski A, Poirier J, Pomara N, 
Popov V, Poppenkv J, Potkin S, Potter G, Poulin S, Prastawa M, Prince J, Priya 
K, Pruessner J, Qiu W, Qu A, Qualls CD, Quarg P, Quinlan J, Rabbia M, 
Rajagovindan R, Rajeesh R, Ramadubramani V, Ramage A, Ramirez A, Randolph C, Rao 
A, Rao H, Reed B, Reid A, Reilhac A, Reiner P, Reinsberger C, Reiss P, Ren J, 
Retico A, Rhatigan L, Rhinn H, Rhoades E, Ribbens A, Richard E, Richards J, 
Richter M, Riddle W, Ridgway G, Ringman J, Rizk-Jackson A, Rizzi M, Rodriguez N, 
Rodriguez L, Rodriguez-Vieitez E, Rogalski E, Rojas Balderrama J, Rokicki J, 
Romero K, Rosand J, Rosen O, Rostant O, Rousseau F, Roy M, Rubright J, Rucinski 
M, Ruiz A, Rulseh A, Rusinek H, Ryan L, Sabuncu M, Saculva M, Sahuquillo J, Said 
Y, Saito N, Sakata M, Salama M, Salazar D, Saman S, Sanchez L, Sanders E, Sankar 
T, Santhamma S, Sarwinda D, Sasaki T, Sasaya T, Sato H, Sattlecker M, Savio A, 
Saykin A, Scanlon B, Scharre D, Schegerin M, Schmand B, Schmansky N, 
Schmidt-Wilcke T, Schneider B, Schott J, Schramm H, Schuerch M, Schultz T, 
Schwartz E, Schwartz P, Schwarz J, Schwarz A, Schweizer T, Selnes P, Sembritzki 
K, Senjem M, Sfikas G, Sghedoni R, Shah JH, Shahbaba B, Shams S, Shankle W, 
Shattuck D, Shaw L, Shen J, Shen Q, Shen J, Shen Q, Shera D, Sherer E, Sherman 
M, Sherva R, Shi J, Shi Y, Shi Y, Shi F, Shilaskar S, Shinohara R, Shokouhi S, 
Shulman J, Sideris K, Siegel R, Silveira M, Silverman D, Simak A, Simmons A, 
Simoes R, Simon H, Simon A, Simonson A, Simpson D, Simpson I, Singh L, Singh N, 
Sinha N, Siuciak J, Sjögren N, Skinner J, Skudlarski P, Smith M, Smith C, Snyder 
P, Soares H, Soldan A, Soldea O, Solomon A, Som S, Song S, Song Z, Sosova I, 
Sotolongo-Grau O, Soydemir M, Spampinato MV, Speier W, Sperling R, Spiegel R, 
Spies L, Springate B, Spychalla A, Staff R, Steenland N, Steffener J, Stern Y, 
Stokman H, Stolzenberg E, Stricker N, Stühler E, Su S, Subramaniam R, Suen S, 
Sugishita M, Suk HI, Suk HI, Sukkar R, Sullivan J, Summers D, Sun H, Sun M, Sun 
Y, Sun Y, Sun J, Sundell K, Sutphen C, Svetnik V, Swamy Y, Swan M, Symons S, 
Szafranska K, Szigeti K, Szoeke C, Sørensen L, Genish T, Takeuchi T, Tanaka R, 
Tanaka S, Tanchi C, Tancredi D, Tang Q, Tanzi R, Tarnow E, Tartaglia MC, Tarver 
E, Tassy D, Tauber C, Taylor-Reinwald L, Teipel S, Teng E, Termenon M, Terriza 
F, Thambisetty M, Thames A, Thatavarti RS, Thiele F, Thomas B, Thomas R, Thomas 
C, Thomas C, Thompson P, Thompson P, Thompson W, Thompson J, Thornton-Wells T, 
Thorvaldsson V, Till H, Tokuda T, Toledo JB, Toma A, Tomita N, Toro R, 
Torrealdea P, Toschi N, Tosto G, Tosun D, Toussaint P, Toyoshiba H, Tractenberg 
RE, Triggs T, Trittschuh E, Trotta G, Truong Huu T, Truran D, Tsalikakis D, 
Tsanas A, Tsang C, Tufail A, Tung J, Turken A, Turner R, Tyagi P, Ueda Y, 
Uematsu D, Ullrich L, Umar N, Ungar L, Valenzuela O, Van de Nes J, van der Lijn 
F, Van Hecke W, Van Horn J, Van Leemput K, Van Train K, Varaganti R, Varkuti B, 
Vasanawala M, Veeraraghavan H, Vellay S, Vemuri P, Verma M, Vinke L, Vinyes G, 
Visser PJ, Vitek M, Vogel S, Voineskos A, Vos S, Vounou M, Wade S, Walsh A, Wang 
A, Wang T, Wang S, Wang DJ, Wang J, Wang Z, Wang X, Wang Z, Wang Y, Wang YM, 
Wang LS, Wang Z, Wang L, Wang T, Wang J, Wang L, Wang S, Wang L, Ward M, Ward A, 
Watson D, Wefel J, Weiner M, Wenzel F, Wesnes K, Westaway S, Westlye LT, Wheland 
D, Whitcher B, White B, Whitlow C, Wilhelmsen K, Wilmot B, Wilson L, Wingo T, 
Wirth M, Wishart H, Wiste H, Wittemer E, Wolf H, Wolke I, Wolz R, Wong T, Wong 
K, Woo J, Woo E, Woods L, Worth A, Wu L, Wu X, Wu Y, Wyman B, Xie S, Xu S, Xu S, 
Xu Y, Xu J, Yamada T, Yamashita F, Yan Y, Yang Z, Yang JJ, Yang HD, Yang E, Yang 
CY, Yang E, Yang H, Yang W, Yassa M, Yatsubo S, Yavorsky C, Ye BS, Yee L, 
Yokoyama J, Yokoyama T, Young S, Younhyun J, Yu CQ, Yu P, Yuan Y, Yuen B, 
Yushkevich P, Zaborszky L, Zagorodnov V, Zahodne L, Zarei M, Zeimpekis K, 
Zeitzer J, Zelinski E, Zeskind B, Zhan S, Zhang Z, Zhang T, Zhang J, Zhang Z, 
Zhang X, Zhang Y, Zhang D, Zhang L, Zhang K, Zhang L, Zhang M, Zhang P, Zhao P, 
Zhao X, Zhijun Y, Zhou L, Zhou B, Zhou Y, Zhu L, Zhu Z, Zhu H, Zhu X, Ziegler G, 
Zilka S, Zisserman A, Zito G, Zito G, Zu C, Zulfigar A.

Author information:
(1)Dementia Research Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK. 
jschott@dementia.ion.ucl.ac.uk

Defining cases and controls on the basis of biomarkers rather than clinical 
diagnosis may reduce sample sizes required for genetic studies. The aim of this 
study was to assess whether characterizing case/control status on the basis of 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) profile would increase power to replicate known 
genetic associations for Alzheimer's disease (AD). Independent of clinical 
diagnosis, Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) subjects with 2 
CSF biomarkers for AD (Aβ1-42 < 192 pg/mL and tau phosphorylated at threonine 
181 (p-tau) > 23 pg/mL, "CSF-positive") were compared with those without CSF 
evidence for AD (Aβ1-42 > 192 pg/mL and 181-phosphorylated tau < 23 pg/mL, 
"CSF-negative"). Minor allele frequency (MAF) and odds ratios (ORs) between 
these 2 groups were calculated for 7 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 
interest. Two hundred thirty-two individuals were CSF-positive and 94 
CSF-negative. There were no differences in age (74.7 ± 7.2 vs. 75.0 ± 6.5 years, 
p = 0.7), but significant differences in Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
(25.9 ± 2.6 vs. 28.2 ± 1.7, p < 0.001) between the CSF-positive and CSF-negative 
groups. Significant differences in MAF (p < 0.05, uncorrected) were seen for CR1 
(rs1408077; OR, 1.59; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.01-2.49), PICALM 
(rs541458; OR, 0.68, 95% CI, 0.47-0.98), TOMM40 (rs2075650; OR, 4.30; 95% CI, 
2.61-7.06); and possession of 1 or more APOE ε4 alleles (OR, 9.84; 95% CI, 
5.48-17.67). These results suggest that using biomarkers of AD pathology to 
define case and control status may increase power in genetic association 
studies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.02.008
PMCID: PMC3150628
PMID: 21459483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The author reports no conflicts of 
interest.


212. Alzheimers Dement (Amst). 2020 May 17;12(1):e12035. doi: 10.1002/dad2.12035. 
eCollection 2020.

High blood pressure predicts hippocampal atrophy rate in cognitively impaired 
elders.

Fiford CM(1), Nicholas JM(2), Biessels GJ(3), Lane CA(1), Cardoso MJ(4)(5), 
Barnes J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, Dementia Research Centre UCL 
Institute of Neurology London UK.
(2)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine London UK.
(3)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery Brain Center Rudolf Magnus 
University Medical Center Utrecht the Netherlands.
(4)School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences King's College London 
London UK.
(5)Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering University College 
London London UK.

INTRODUCTION: Understanding relationships among blood pressure (BP), cognition, 
and brain volume could inform Alzheimer's disease (AD) management.
METHODS: We investigated Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
participants: 200 controls, 346 mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and 154 AD. 
National Alzheimer's Co-ordinating Center (NACC) participants were separately 
analyzed: 1098 controls, 2297 MCI, and 4845 AD. Relationships between cognition 
and BP were assessed in both cohorts and BP and atrophy rates in ADNI. 
Multivariate mixed linear-regression models were fitted with joint outcomes of 
BP (systolic, diastolic, and pulse pressure), cognition (Mini-Mental State 
Examination, Logical Memory, and Digit Symbol) and atrophy rate (whole-brain, 
hippocampus).
RESULTS: ADNI MCI and AD patients with greater baseline systolic BP had higher 
hippocampal atrophy rates ([r, P value]; 0.2, 0.005 and 0.2, 0.04, 
respectively). NACC AD patients with lower systolic BP had lower cognitive 
scores (0.1, 0.0003).
DISCUSSION: Higher late-life BP may be associated with faster decline in 
cognitively impaired elders.

© 2020 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease 
Monitoring published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of the Alzheimer's 
Association.

DOI: 10.1002/dad2.12035
PMCID: PMC7308793
PMID: 32587882

Conflict of interest statement: There are no reported conflicts apart from a 
note that Christopher Lane is now employed by Eisai Europe Ltd.


213. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021 Apr 27;13:667899. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.667899. 
eCollection 2021.

The Effects of CSF Neurogranin and APOE ε4 on Cognition and Neuropathology in 
Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer's Disease.

Fan Y, Gao Y, Therriault J, Luo J, Ba M, Zhang H; Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) measurements of neurogranin (Ng) have emerged as a 
promising biomarker for cognitive decline in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). The apolipoprotein E ε4 (APOE ε4) allele is by far the 
most consistent genetic risk factor for AD. However, it is not known whether the 
pathophysiological roles of Ng in MCI or AD are related to APOEε4. We stratified 
250 participants from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
database into cognitively normal (CN) ε4 negative (CN ε4-), CN ε4 positive (CN 
ε4+), MCI ε4 negative (MCI ε4-), MCI ε4 positive (MCI ε4+), AD ε4 negative (AD 
ε4-), and AD ε4 positive (AD ε4+). CSF Ng levels were significantly increased in 
APOE ε4 carriers compared to APOE ε4 non-carriers with MCI. In addition, CSF Ng 
identified MCI ε4+ versus CN ε4-, but not MCI ε4- versus CN ε4-. Similarly, CSF 
Ng negatively correlated with Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores at 
baseline in the MCI ε4+ group. Our findings support the use of CSF Ng as a 
biomarker of synaptic pathology for AD. We propose that the roles of CSF Ng in 
the pathophysiology of MCI may be related to APOE ε4.

Copyright © 2021 Fan, Gao, Therriault, Luo, Ba and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.667899
PMCID: PMC8110906
PMID: 33986657

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


214. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;80(4):1553-1565. doi: 10.3233/JAD-200759.

Peripheral Markers of Vascular Endothelial Dysfunction Show Independent but 
Additive Relationships with Brain-Based Biomarkers in Association with 
Functional Impairment in Alzheimer's Disease.

Drake JD(1)(2), Chambers AB(3), Ott BR(1)(2), Daiello LA(1)(2); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease and Memory Disorders Center, Rhode Island Hospital, 
Providence, RI, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Brown University Warren Alpert Medical School, 
Providence RI, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Brown University Warren Alpert Medical School, 
Providence RI, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cerebrovascular dysfunction confers risk for functional decline in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), yet the clinical interplay of these two pathogenic 
processes is not well understood.
OBJECTIVE: We utilized Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) data 
to examine associations between peripherally derived soluble cell adhesion 
molecules (CAMs) and clinical diagnostic indicators of AD.
METHODS: Using generalized linear regression models, we examined cross-sectional 
relationships of soluble plasma vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), 
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), and E-Selectin to baseline diagnosis 
and functional impairment (clinical dementia rating sum-of-boxes, CDR-SB) in the 
ADNI cohort (n = 112 AD, n = 396 mild cognitive impairment (MCI), n = 58 
cognitively normal). We further analyzed associations of these biomarkers with 
brain-based AD biomarkers in a subset with available cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
data (n = 351). p-values derived from main effects and interaction terms from 
the linear regressions were used to assess the relationship between independent 
and dependent variables for significance (significance level was set at 0.05 a 
priori for all analysis).
RESULTS: Higher mean VCAM-1 (p = 0.0026) and ICAM-1 (p = 0.0189) levels were 
found in AD versus MCI groups; however, not in MCI versus cognitively normal 
groups. Only VCAM-1 was linked with CDR-SB scores (p = 0.0157), and APOE ɛ4 
genotype modified this effect. We observed independent, additive associations 
when VCAM-1 and CSF amyloid-β (Aβ42), total tau, phosphorylated tau (P-tau), or 
P-tau/Aβ42 (all < p = 0.01) were combined in a CDR-SB model; ICAM-1 showed a 
similar pattern, but to a lesser extent.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate independent associations of plasma-based 
vascular biomarkers and CSF biomarkers with AD-related clinical impairment.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-200759
PMCID: PMC8150492
PMID: 33720880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors’ disclosures available online 
(https://www.j-alz.com/manuscript-disclosures/20-0759r2).


215. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2022 Nov 4;14(1):165. doi: 10.1186/s13195-022-01107-3.

Plasma adiponectin levels predict cognitive decline and cortical thinning in 
mild cognitive impairment with beta-amyloid pathology.

Kim KY(1)(2), Ha J(1), Kim M(1), Cho SY(1)(3), Kim H(1)(3), Kim E(4)(5); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Institute of Behavioral Science in Medicine, Yonsei 
University College of Medicine, 50-1 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Seoul Metropolitan Government - Seoul National 
University Boramae Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Brain Korea 21 FOUR Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Institute of Behavioral Science in Medicine, Yonsei 
University College of Medicine, 50-1 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea. eosu.kim@yonsei.ac.kr.
(5)Brain Korea 21 FOUR Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. eosu.kim@yonsei.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Blood adiponectin and leptin are adipokines that emerged as 
potential biomarkers for predicting Alzheimer's disease (AD) owing to their 
strong connection with obesity. Although obesity affects the relation between 
beta-amyloid (Aβ) aggregation and cognitive decline, the longitudinal 
interactive effect of adipokines and Aβ on cognition and brain structures in 
humans remains unexplored. Hence, we investigated whether plasma levels of 
adiponectin and leptin are associated with future cognitive decline and cortical 
thinning across Aβ conditions (Aβ [+] and Aβ [-]) in individuals with mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: Of 156 participants with MCI from the longitudinal cohort study of 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), 31 were Aβ (-) and 125 were 
Aβ (+) as determined by CSF analysis. The Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog) scores and the thickness of the 
parahippocampal and entorhinal cortices were used to evaluate cognition and 
brain structure, respectively. After stratifying groups by Aβ conditions, the 
association of cognitive and brain structural changes with baseline plasma 
levels of adiponectin and leptin was examined.
RESULTS: Of the total 156 participants, 51 were women (32.7%). The mean age of 
participants was 74.5 (standard deviation 7.57), and the mean follow-up period 
was 54.3 months, without a difference between the Aβ (+) and (-) groups. After 
adjustment for confounders, higher plasma adiponectin levels were associated 
with a faster increase in ADAS-Cog scores, indicating faster cognitive decline 
under the Aβ (+) condition (beta = 0.224, p = 0.018). Likewise, participants 
with higher plasma adiponectin presented faster cortical thinning in the 
bilateral parahippocampal cortices under the Aβ (+) condition (beta = - 0.004, p 
= 0.012 for the right side; beta = - 0.004, p = 0.025 for the left side). 
Interestingly, plasma adiponectin levels were not associated with longitudinal 
ADAS-Cog scores or cortical thickness in the Aβ (-) condition. Plasma leptin 
levels were not predictive of cognition or cortical thickness regardless of Aβ 
status.
CONCLUSION: Plasma adiponectin can be a potential biomarker for predicting the 
speed of AD progression in individuals with Aβ (+) MCI.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-022-01107-3
PMCID: PMC9635143
PMID: 36329496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


216. Neuroimage Clin. 2021;32:102799. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2021.102799. Epub 2021 Aug 
24.

Apolipoprotein E allele 4 effects on Single-Subject Gray Matter Networks in Mild 
Cognitive Impairment.

Sanabria-Diaz G(1), Demonet JF(2), Rodriguez-Herreros B(3), Draganski B(4), 
Kherif F(5), Melie-Garcia L(6).

Author information:
(1)LREN, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University Hospital 
(CHUV), Rue du Bugnon 46, Mont Paisible 16, Lausanne, Vaud 1011, Switzerland; 
Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne (UNIL), Rue du Bugnon 
21, Lausanne CH-1011, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
gretels.sanabria@gmail.com.
(2)Leenaards Memory Center, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), Rue du Bugnon 
21, Mont Paisible 16, Lausanne 1011, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
Jean-Francois.Demonet@chuv.ch.
(3)Cantonal Autism Center, University of Lausanne. University Hospital Lausanne. 
Av. de Beaumont 23, Lausanne 1011, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
borja.rodriguez84@gmail.com.
(4)LREN, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University Hospital 
(CHUV), Rue du Bugnon 46, Mont Paisible 16, Lausanne, Vaud 1011, Switzerland; 
Max-Planck-Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Postfach 500355, 
Leipzig D-04303, Germany. Electronic address: bogdan.draganski@chuv.ch.
(5)LREN, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University Hospital 
(CHUV), Rue du Bugnon 46, Mont Paisible 16, Lausanne, Vaud 1011, Switzerland. 
Electronic address: Ferath.Kherif@chuv.ch.
(6)Applied Signal Processing Group (ASPG), Swiss Federal Institute of Technology 
Lausanne (EPFL), Route Cantonale, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland; Translational 
Imaging in Neurology Group (ThINk), Department of Biomedical Engineering, 
University of Basel and University Hospital Basel, Gewerbestrasse 14, 
Allschwil., Basel 4123, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
lester.meliegarcia@unibas.ch.

There is evidence that gray matter networks are disrupted in Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (MCI) and associated with cognitive impairment and faster disease 
progression. However, it remains unknown how these alterations are related to 
the presence of Apolipoprotein E isoform E4 (ApoE4), the most prominent genetic 
risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). To investigate this topic 
at the individual level, we explore the impact of ApoE4 and the disease 
progression on the Single-Subject Gray Matter Networks (SSGMNets) using the 
graph theory approach. Our data sample comprised 200 MCI patients selected from 
the ADNI database, classified as non-Converters and Converters (will progress 
into AD). Each group included 50 ApoE4-positive ('Carriers', ApoE4 + ) and 50 
ApoE4-negative ('non-Carriers', ApoE4-). The SSGMNets were estimated from 
structural MRIs at two-time points: baseline and conversion. We investigated 
whether altered network topological measures at baseline and their rate of 
change (RoC) between baseline and conversion time points were associated with 
ApoE4 and disease progression. We also explored the correlation of SSGMNets 
attributes with general cognition score (MMSE), memory (ADNI-MEM), and 
CSF-derived biomarkers of AD (Aβ42, T-tau, and P-tau). Our results showed that 
ApoE4 and the disease progression modulated the global topological network 
properties independently but not in their RoC. MCI converters showed a lower 
clustering index in several regions associated with neurodegeneration in AD. The 
SSGMNets' topological organization was revealed to be able to predict cognitive 
and memory measures. The findings presented here suggest that SSGMNets could 
indeed be used to identify MCI ApoE4 Carriers with a high risk for AD 
progression.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2021.102799
PMCID: PMC8405842
PMID: 34469849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


217. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2024 Feb 1;10(1):e12442. doi: 10.1002/trc2.12442. 
eCollection 2024 Jan-Mar.

Longitudinal associations of apathy and regional tau in mild cognitive 
impairment and dementia: Findings from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Premnath PY(1), Locascio JJ(2)(3), Mimmack KJ(2), Gonzalez C(4), Properzi 
MJ(2)(5), Udeogu O(2), Rosenberg PB(6), Marshall GA(2)(3)(7)(8), Gatchel 
JR(9)(10)(11)(12); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology The Graduate Center, City University of New York New 
York New York USA.
(2)Department of Neurology Massachusetts General Hospital Boston Massachusetts 
USA.
(3)Department of Neurology Harvard Medical School Boston Massachusetts USA.
(4)Department of Psychology Illinois Institute of Technology Chicago Illinois 
USA.
(5)Department of Neurology Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging 
Charlestown Massachusetts USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine Baltimore Maryland USA.
(7)Department of Neurology Brigham and Women's Hospital Boston Massachusetts 
USA.
(8)Center for Alzheimer Research and Treatment Brigham and Women's Hospital 
Boston Massachusetts USA.
(9)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry McLean Hospital Belmont Massachusetts USA.
(10)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences Baylor College of Medicine 
Houston Texas USA.
(11)Department of Veterans Affairs Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center Houston 
Texas USA.
(12)Department of Psychiatry Harvard Medical School Boston Massachusetts USA.

INTRODUCTION: It is important to study apathy in Alzheimer's disease (AD) to 
better understand its underlying neurobiology and develop effective 
interventions. In the current study, we sought to examine the relationships 
between longitudinal apathy and regional tau burden in cognitively impaired 
older adults from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
database.
METHODS: Three hundred and nineteen ADNI participants with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) or AD dementia underwent flortaucipir (FTP) tau positron 
emission tomography (PET) imaging and clinical assessment with the 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) annually. Longitudinal NPI Apathy (NPI-A) 
scores were examined in relation to baseline tau PET signal in three a priori 
selected regions implicated in AD and AD-related apathy (supramarginal gyrus, 
entorhinal cortex [EC] and rostral anterior cingulate cortex [rACC]). Secondary 
models were adjusted for global cognition (Mini-Mental State Examination score) 
and cortical amyloid (florbetapir PET).
RESULTS: Higher baseline supramarginal gyrus and EC tau burden were each 
significantly associated with greater NPI-A over time, while rACC tau was 
associated with higher NPI-A but did not predict its trajectory over time. These 
results were retained for supramarginal and EC tau after adjusting models for 
global cognition and cortical amyloid.
DISCUSSION: Our findings suggest that baseline in vivo tau burden in parietal 
and temporal brain regions affected in AD, and less so in a medial frontal 
region involved in motivational control, is associated with increasing apathy 
over time in older adults with MCI and AD dementia. Future work studying 
emergent apathy in relation to not only core AD pathology but also circuit level 
dysfunction may provide additional insight into the neurobiology of apathy in AD 
and opportunities for intervention.
HIGHLIGHTS: Tau (Flortaucipir PET) in regions implicated in AD was associated 
with increasing apathy over timeCortical amyloid was also found to be a robust 
predictor of the trajectory of apathyEvidence of synergy between regional tau 
and amyloid in overall higher levels of apathy.

© 2024 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical 
Interventions published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's 
Association.

DOI: 10.1002/trc2.12442
PMCID: PMC10865481
PMID: 38356477

Conflict of interest statement: P.Y.P., C.G., K.J.M., O.U., M.P., and J.L. have 
nothing to disclose. J.R.G. has received past research support from Merck. 
G.A.M. has received research salary support from Eisai Inc., Eli Lilly and 
Company, and Genentech. P.B.R. has received research support from Lilly and 
Eisai, consulting fees from Acadia, Biogen, ExpertConnect, G.L.G., H.M.P. 
Global, Leerink, Lundbeck, Medalink, MEDACorp, Medscape, Neurology Week, Novo 
Nordisk, Noble Insights, and Two Labs, and serves on a DSMB for Synaptogenix. 
Author disclosures are available in the supporting information.


218. Clin Epigenetics. 2020 Jun 15;12(1):84. doi: 10.1186/s13148-020-00864-y.

Harnessing peripheral DNA methylation differences in the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) to reveal novel biomarkers of disease.

Vasanthakumar A(1), Davis JW(2), Idler K(2), Waring JF(2), Asque E(2), 
Riley-Gillis B(2), Grosskurth S(2), Srivastava G(3), Kim S(4)(5), Nho K(4), 
Nudelman KNH(4)(6), Faber K(6), Sun Y(7)(8), Foroud TM(6), Estrada K(9)(10), 
Apostolova LG(4), Li QS(7)(8), Saykin AJ(4); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Genomics Research Center, AbbVie, North Chicago, IL, USA. 
aparna.vasanthakumar@abbvie.com.
(2)Genomics Research Center, AbbVie, North Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Exploratory Statistics, AbbVie, North Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Center for Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(5)Electrical and Computer Engineering, State University of New York, Oswego, 
NY, 13126, USA.
(6)National Centralized Repository for Alzheimer's Disease and Related 
Dementias, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(7)Neuroscience Therapeutic Area, Janssen Research & Development, Pennington, 
NJ, 08534, USA.
(8)Research Information Technology, Janssen Research & Development, Pennington, 
NJ, 08534, USA.
(9)Biogen, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA.
(10)Currently at Biomarin Pharmaceuticals, Novato, CA, 94949, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a chronic progressive neurodegenerative 
disease impacting an estimated 44 million adults worldwide. The causal pathology 
of AD (accumulation of amyloid-beta and tau), precedes hallmark symptoms of 
dementia by more than a decade, necessitating development of early diagnostic 
markers of disease onset, particularly for new drugs that aim to modify disease 
processes. To evaluate differentially methylated positions (DMPs) as novel 
blood-based biomarkers of AD, we used a subset of 653 individuals with 
peripheral blood (PB) samples in the Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) consortium. The selected cohort of AD, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 
and age-matched healthy controls (CN) all had imaging, genetics, 
transcriptomics, cerebrospinal protein markers, and comprehensive clinical 
records, providing a rich resource of concurrent multi-omics and phenotypic 
information on a well-phenotyped subset of ADNI participants.
RESULTS: In this manuscript, we report cross-diagnosis differential peripheral 
DNA methylation in a cohort of AD, MCI, and age-matched CN individuals with 
longitudinal DNA methylation measurements. Epigenome-wide association studies 
(EWAS) were performed using a mixed model with repeated measures over time with 
a P value cutoff of 1 × 10-5 to test contrasts of pairwise differential 
peripheral methylation in AD vs CN, AD vs MCI, and MCI vs CN. The most highly 
significant differentially methylated loci also tracked with Mini Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) scores. Differentially methylated loci were enriched near 
brain and neurodegeneration-related genes (e.g., BDNF, BIN1, APOC1) validated 
using the genotype tissue expression project portal (GTex).
CONCLUSIONS: Our work shows that peripheral differential methylation between 
age-matched subjects with AD relative to healthy controls will provide 
opportunities to further investigate and validate differential methylation as a 
surrogate of disease. Given the inaccessibility of brain tissue, the 
PB-associated methylation marks may help identify the stage of disease and 
progression phenotype, information that would be central to bringing forward 
successful drugs for AD.

DOI: 10.1186/s13148-020-00864-y
PMCID: PMC7294637
PMID: 32539856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AV, JWD, KI, EA, BRG, SG, GS, and JFW are all 
employees of AbbVie and may hold stock. YS, QSL are employees of Janssen, and KE 
was an employee of Biogen.


219. PLoS One. 2017 Oct 31;12(10):e0187364. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187364. 
eCollection 2017.

Using redescription mining to relate clinical and biological characteristics of 
cognitively impaired and Alzheimer's disease patients.

Mihelčić M(1)(2), Šimić G(3), Babić Leko M(3), Lavrač N(2)(4), Džeroski S(2)(4), 
Šmuc T(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Division of Electronics, Ruđer Bošković Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Jožef Stefan International Postgraduate School, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)Department for Neuroscience, Croatian Institute for Brain Research, 
University of Zagreb Medical School, Zagreb, Croatia.
(4)Department of Knowledge Technologies, Jožef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, 
Slovenia.

Based on a set of subjects and a collection of attributes obtained from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative database, we used redescription 
mining to find interpretable rules revealing associations between those 
determinants that provide insights about the Alzheimer's disease (AD). We 
extended the CLUS-RM redescription mining algorithm to a constraint-based 
redescription mining (CBRM) setting, which enables several modes of targeted 
exploration of specific, user-constrained associations. Redescription mining 
enabled finding specific constructs of clinical and biological attributes that 
describe many groups of subjects of different size, homogeneity and levels of 
cognitive impairment. We confirmed some previously known findings. However, in 
some instances, as with the attributes: testosterone, ciliary neurotrophic 
factor, brain natriuretic peptide, Fas ligand, the imaging attribute Spatial 
Pattern of Abnormalities for Recognition of Early AD, as well as the levels of 
leptin and angiopoietin-2 in plasma, we corroborated previously debatable 
findings or provided additional information about these variables and their 
association with AD pathogenesis. Moreover, applying redescription mining on 
ADNI data resulted with the discovery of one largely unknown attribute: the 
Pregnancy-Associated Protein-A (PAPP-A), which we found highly associated with 
cognitive impairment in AD. Statistically significant correlations (p ≤ 0.01) 
were found between PAPP-A and clinical tests: Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale, Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes, Mini Mental State Examination, 
etc. The high importance of this finding lies in the fact that PAPP-A is a 
metalloproteinase, known to cleave insulin-like growth factor binding proteins. 
Since it also shares similar substrates with A Disintegrin and the 
Metalloproteinase family of enzymes that act as α-secretase to physiologically 
cleave amyloid precursor protein (APP) in the non-amyloidogenic pathway, it 
could be directly involved in the metabolism of APP very early during the 
disease course. Therefore, further studies should investigate the role of PAPP-A 
in the development of AD more thoroughly.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187364
PMCID: PMC5663625
PMID: 29088293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


220. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021 Dec 6;13:774607. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.774607. 
eCollection 2021.

A Comparative Study of Structural and Metabolic Brain Networks in Patients With 
Mild Cognitive Impairment.

Wei C(1)(2), Gong S(1)(3), Zou Q(1)(4), Zhang W(5), Kang X(1)(3), Lu X(1)(3), 
Chen Y(1), Yang Y(1)(3), Wang W(1), Jia L(1), Lyu J(6), Shan B(5).

Author information:
(1)Innovation Center for Neurological Disorders and Department of Neurology, 
Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, National Clinical Research Center 
for Geriatric Diseases, Beijing, China.
(2)Center of Alzheimer's Disease, Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, Beijing 
Key Laboratory of Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, Neurodegenerative Laboratory of 
Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China, Beijing, China.
(3)School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Beihang University, 
Beijing, China.
(4)College of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Changchun 
University of Chinese Medicine, Changchun, China.
(5)Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Neurodegenerative Laboratory of Ministry of Education of the People's Republic 
of China, Beijing, China.
(6)Center for Cognitive Disorders, Beijing Geriatric Hospital, Beijing, China.

Background: Changes in the metabolic and structural brain networks in mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) have been widely researched. However, few studies 
have compared the differences in the topological properties of the metabolic and 
structural brain networks in patients with MCI. Methods: We analyzedmagnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) and fluoro-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography 
(FDG-PET) data of 137 patients with MCI and 80 healthy controls (HCs). The HC 
group data comes from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
database. The permutation test was used to compare the network parameters 
(characteristic path length, clustering coefficient, local efficiency, and 
global efficiency) between the two groups. Partial Pearson's correlation 
analysis was used to calculate the correlations of the changes in gray matter 
volume and glucose intake in the key brain regions in MCI with the Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive (ADAS-cog) sub-item scores. Results: 
Significant changes in the brain network parameters (longer characteristic path 
length, larger clustering coefficient, and lower local efficiency and global 
efficiency) were greater in the structural network than in the metabolic network 
(longer characteristic path length) in MCI patients than in HCs. We obtained the 
key brain regions (left globus pallidus, right calcarine fissure and its 
surrounding cortex, left lingual gyrus) by scanning the hubs. The volume of gray 
matter atrophy in the left globus pallidus was significantly positively 
correlated with comprehension of spoken language (p = 0.024) and word-finding 
difficulty in spontaneous speech item scores (p = 0.007) in the ADAS-cog. 
Glucose intake in the three key brain regions was significantly negatively 
correlated with remembering test instructions items in ADAS-cog (p = 0.020, p = 
0.014, and p = 0.008, respectively). Conclusion: Structural brain networks 
showed more changes than metabolic brain networks in patients with MCI. Some 
brain regions with significant changes in betweenness centrality in both 
structural and metabolic networks were associated with MCI.

Copyright © 2021 Wei, Gong, Zou, Zhang, Kang, Lu, Chen, Yang, Wang, Jia, Lyu and 
Shan.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.774607
PMCID: PMC8687449
PMID: 34938173

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


221. Aging Clin Exp Res. 2018 Oct;30(10):1167-1176. doi: 10.1007/s40520-018-0899-8. 
Epub 2018 Jan 29.

Utility of the Spanish version of the Everyday Cognition scale in the diagnosis 
of mild cognitive impairment and mild dementia in an older cohort from the 
Argentina-ADNI.

Russo MJ(1), Cohen G(2), Chrem Mendez P(2), Campos J(2), Martín ME(2), Clarens 
MF(2), Tapajoz F(2), Harris P(2), Sevlever G(2), Allegri RF(2).

Author information:
(1)Center of Aging and Memory of Neurological Research Institute (FLENI), 
Montañeses 2325, C1428AQK, Buenos Aires, Argentina. jrusso@fleni.org.ar.
(2)Center of Aging and Memory of Neurological Research Institute (FLENI), 
Montañeses 2325, C1428AQK, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

INTRODUCTION: The performance of activities of daily living in elderly patients 
with memory disorders is directly related to living independently and to 
autonomy. Documenting and assessing functional capacity through detailed scales 
is important for both diagnostic and treatment recommendations. The Everyday 
Cognition (ECog) scale is a relatively new informant-rated measure of cognitive 
and functional abilities. In the present study, the discriminant validity of the 
ECog scale was evaluated in cognitively intact controls (CN) and in patients 
with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and mild Alzheimer's disease (AD) from the 
Argentina-ADNI cohort to establish diagnostic accuracy. In addition, we compared 
the sensitivity and specificity of ECog against Functional Assessment 
Questionnaire (FAQ) scale to discriminate among the three groups.
METHODS: We evaluated 15 CN, 28 MCI, and 13 mild AD subjects. External, 
convergent and divergent validity and internal consistency were examined.
RESULTS: The average total score on the ECog was significantly different across 
the three diagnostic syndromes (p < .05). The ECog was more sensitive than FAQ 
in discriminating between CN and MCI patients and between MCI and AD subjects. 
The ECog showed a strong correlation with FAQ, and moderate correlations with 
neuropsychological tests. Cronbach's alpha was .98.
CONCLUSIONS: The ECog scale is an efficient instrument for the differentiation 
of individuals with mild dementia or MCI from normal older adults, with good 
accuracy and good correlation with other tests measuring daily and cognitive 
functions. Comparing against FAQ, ECog was more useful in assessing changes in 
functionality in MCI patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s40520-018-0899-8
PMID: 29380265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;62(4):1567-1578. doi: 10.3233/JAD-170918.

Differential Effect of APOE ɛ4 Status and Elevated Pulse Pressure on Functional 
Decline in Cognitively Normal Older Adults.

Werhane ML(1)(2)(3), Thomas KR(1)(3), Edmonds EC(1)(3), Bangen KJ(1)(3), Tran 
M(4), Clark AL(1)(2)(3), Nation DA(5), Gilbert PE(2), Bondi MW(1)(3), 
Delano-Wood L(1)(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, CA, USA.
(2)San Diego State University/University of California, San Diego (SDSU/UCSD) 
Joint Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology, San Diego, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVE: The APOE ɛ4 allele and increased vascular risk have both 
been independently linked to cognitive impairment and dementia. Since few 
studies have characterized how these risk factors affect everyday functioning, 
we investigated the relationship between APOE ɛ4 genotype and elevated pulse 
pressure (PP) on functional change in cognitively normal participants from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).
METHODS: 738 normally aging participants underwent APOE genotyping, and baseline 
PP was calculated from blood pressure indices. The Functional Activities 
Questionnaire (FAQ) was completed by participants' informant at baseline and 6, 
12, 24, 36, and 48-month follow-up visits. Multiple linear regression and 
multilevel modeling were used to examine the effects of PP and APOE ɛ4 genotype 
on cross-sectional and longitudinal FAQ scores, respectively.
RESULTS: Adjusting for demographic and clinical covariates, results showed that 
both APOE ɛ4 status and elevated PP predicted greater functional difficulty 
trajectories across four years of follow-up. Interestingly, however, elevated PP 
was associated with greater functional decline over time in ɛ4 non-carriers 
versus carriers.
CONCLUSION: Results show that, although APOE ɛ4 status is the prominent 
predictor of functional difficulty for ɛ4 carriers, an effect of arterial 
stiffening on functional difficulty was observed in non-carriers. Future studies 
are needed in order to clarify the etiology of the association between PP and 
different brain aging processes, and further explore its utility as a marker of 
dementia risk. The present study underscores the importance of targeting 
modifiable risk factors such as elevated PP to prevent or slow functional 
decline and pathological brain aging.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-170918
PMID: 29562507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2021;8(1):78-83. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2020.64.

Polygenic Risk Scoring is an Effective Approach to Predict Those Individuals 
Most Likely to Decline Cognitively Due to Alzheimer's Disease.

Daunt P(1), Ballard CG, Creese B, Davidson G, Hardy J, Oshota O, Pither RJ, 
Gibson AM.

Author information:
(1)Alex Gibson, Cytox Ltd., John Eccles House, Robert Robinson Avenue, Oxford 
Science Park, Oxford, OX4 4GP, United Kingdom. Email: 
alex.gibson@cytoxgroup.com. Tel:+44 (0)1865 338018.

BACKGROUND: There is a clear need for simple and effective tests to identify 
individuals who are most likely to develop Alzheimer's Disease (AD) both for the 
purposes of clinical trial recruitment but also for improved management of 
patients who may be experiencing early pre-clinical symptoms or who have 
clinical concerns.
OBJECTIVES: To predict individuals at greatest risk of progression of cognitive 
impairment due to Alzheimer's Disease in individuals from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) using a polygenic risk scoring algorithm. 
To compare the performance of a PRS algorithm in predicting cognitive decline 
against that of using the pTau/Aß1-42 ratio CSF biomarker profile.
DESIGN: A longitudinal analysis of data from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative study conducted across over 50 sites in the US and 
Canada.
SETTING: Multi-center genetics study.
PARTICPANTS: 515 subjects who upon entry to the study were diagnosed as 
cognitively normal or with mild cognitive impairment.
MEASUREMENTS: Use of genotyping and/or whole genome sequencing data to calculate 
polygenic risk scores and assess ability to predict subsequent cognitive decline 
as measured by CDR-SB and ADAS-Cog13 over 4 years.
RESULTS: The overall performance for predicting those individuals who would 
decline by at least 15 ADAS-Cog13 points from a baseline mild cognitive 
impairment in 4 years was 72.8% (CI:67.9-77.7) AUC increasing to 79.1% (CI: 
75.6-82.6) when also including cognitively normal participants. Assessing mild 
cognitive impaired subjects only and using a threshold of greater than 0.6, the 
high genetic risk participant group declined, on average, by 1.4 points (CDR-SB) 
more than the low risk group over 4 years. The performance of the PRS algorithm 
tested was similar to that of the pTau/Aß1-42 ratio CSF biomarker profile in 
predicting cognitive decline.
CONCLUSION: Calculating polygenic risk scores offers a simple and effective way, 
using DNA extracted from a simple mouth swab, to select mild cognitively 
impaired patients who are most likely to decline cognitively over the next four 
years.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2020.64
PMID: 33336228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P. Daunt, A.Gibson, O.Oshota and R. Pither are 
all employees of Cytox Ltd. G. Davidson received payment from Cytox Ltd. for 
work done both within and outside the scope of this article.


224. Eur J Neurol. 2024 Jan;31(1):e16072. doi: 10.1111/ene.16072. Epub 2023 Sep 22.

Frailty is associated with the clinical expression of neuropsychological 
deficits in older adults.

Canevelli M(1)(2), Wallace LMK(3), Bruno G(1), Cesari M(4), Rockwood K(5)(6)(7), 
Ward DD(5)(6)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Neuroscience, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
(2)Aging Research Center, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, 
Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Cambridge Public Health, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
(5)Divisions of Geriatric Medicine, Department of Medicine & Neurology, 
Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(6)Geriatric Medicine Research, Centre for Health Care of the Elderly, Nova 
Scotia Health Authority, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(7)Kathryn Allen Weldon Professor of Alzheimer Research, Department of Medicine, 
Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(8)Faculty of Medicine, Centre for Health Services Research, The University of 
Queensland, Woolloongabba, Queensland, Australia.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The aim was to determine whether frailty is associated 
with the relationship between neuropsychological markers and global cognition in 
older adults.
METHODS: Cross-sectional analyzes were conducted of baseline data from three 
large cohort studies: National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC), Rush 
Memory and Aging Project (MAP) and Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI). Studies recruited North American participants along the spectrum of 
cognitive functioning (44% no cognitive impairment at baseline). A frailty index 
was computed in each dataset. Frailty indices, neuropsychological tests 
(including measures of processing speed, episodic, semantic and working memory) 
and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores were the variables of interest, 
with age, sex, education and apolipoprotein E ε4 evaluated as confounders.
RESULTS: Across all studies, 23,819 participants aged 55-104 (57% female) were 
included in analyzes. Frailty index scores were significantly and inversely 
associated with MMSE scores and significantly moderated relationships between 
neuropsychological test scores and MMSE scores. In participants with higher 
frailty index scores, lower neuropsychological test scores were more strongly 
associated with lower MMSE scores (standardized interaction coefficients ranged 
from -0.19 to -1.17 in NACC, -0.03 to -2.27 in MAP and -0.04 to -0.38 in ADNI, 
depending on the neuropsychological test). These associations were consistent 
across the different databases and were mostly independent of the composition of 
frailty indices (i.e., after excluding possible symptoms of dementia).
CONCLUSIONS: Amongst older Americans, frailty is associated with the cognitive 
expression of neuropsychological deficits. Implementation of frailty assessment 
in routine neurological and neuropsychological practice should be considered to 
optimize care outcomes for older adults.

© 2023 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.16072
PMCID: PMC11235878
PMID: 37738515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: KR is Co‐founder of Ardea Outcomes, which (as 
DGI Clinical) in the last 3 years has contracts with pharma and device 
manufacturers on individualized outcome measurement. MCa, LMKW, GB, MCe and DDW 
have nothing to report.


225. Radiology. 2018 Dec;289(3):775-785. doi: 10.1148/radiol.2018180092. Epub 2018 
Sep 11.

Altered Nucleus Basalis Connectivity Predicts Treatment Response in Mild 
Cognitive Impairment.

Meng D(1), Li X(1), Bauer M(1), Taylor JP(1), Auer DP(1); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Sir Peter Mansfield Imaging Centre, School of Medicine (D.M., X.L., 
D.P.A.), and School of Psychology (M.B.), University of Nottingham, Nottingham, 
England; NIHR Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre, Queen's Medical Centre, 
University of Nottingham, Derby Rd, Nottingham NG7 2UH, England (D.M., X.L., 
D.P.A.); and Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Campus for Ageing 
and Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, England (J.P.T.).

Comment in
    Radiology. 2018 Dec;289(3):786-787. doi: 10.1148/radiol.2018181783.

Purpose To determine whether functional connectivity (FC) mapping of nucleus 
basalis of Meynert (NBM) cholinergic network (hereafter, NBM FC) could provide a 
biomarker of central cholinergic deficits with predictive potential for response 
to cholinesterase inhibitor (ChEI) treatment. Materials and Methods The 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) was approved by the 
institutional review boards of all participating sites. All participants and 
their representatives gave written informed consent prior to data collection. 
NBM FC was examined in 33 healthy control participants, 102 patients with mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI), and 33 patients with AD by using resting-state 
functional MRI data from the ADNI database. NBM FC was compared between groups 
before and after 6 months of ChEI treatment in MCI. Associations between 
baseline NBM FC and baseline cognitive performance as well as cognitive outcomes 
after treatment were investigated. Results Compared with the healthy control 
group, NBM FC was decreased in patients with untreated MCI and increased in 
patients with AD treated with ChEI (corrected P ˂ .05). Global cognition 
(Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive subscale score) was associated 
with NBM FC (r = -0.349; P ˂ .001). NBM FC was higher 6 months after ChEI 
compared with before ChEI in treated MCI (corrected P ˂ .05), but did not change 
at 6 months in patients with untreated MCI (corrected P ˂ .05). Baseline NBM FC 
in MCI strongly predicted cognitive outcomes 6 months after ChEI (R2 = 0.458; P 
= .001). Conclusion Functional dissociation of the nucleus basalis of Meynert 
from a cortical network may explain the cognitive deficits in dementia and allow 
for the selection of individuals who are more likely to respond to 
cholinesterase inhibitors at early disease stages. © RSNA, 2018 Online 
supplemental material is available for this article.

DOI: 10.1148/radiol.2018180092
PMCID: PMC6283326
PMID: 30204076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


226. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Sep 10:2024.09.05.611489. doi: 
10.1101/2024.09.05.611489.

Harmonization of Structural Brain Connectivity through Distribution Matching.

Zhou Z(1), Fischl B(1), Aganj I(1).

Author information:
(1)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Radiology Department, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.

The increasing prevalence of multi-site diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance 
imaging (dMRI) studies potentially offers enhanced statistical power for 
investigating brain structure. However, these studies face challenges due to 
variations in scanner hardware and acquisition protocols. While several methods 
exist for dMRI data harmonization, few specifically address structural brain 
connectivity. We introduce a new distribution-matching approach to harmonizing 
structural brain connectivity across different sites and scanners. We evaluate 
our method using structural brain connectivity data from two distinct datasets 
of OASIS-3 and ADNI-2, comparing its performance to the widely used ComBat 
method. Our approach is meant to align the statistical properties of 
connectivity data from these two datasets. We examine the impact of 
harmonization on the correlation of brain connectivity with the Mini-Mental 
State Examination score and age. Our results demonstrate that our 
distribution-matching technique more effectively harmonizes structural brain 
connectivity, often producing stronger and more significant correlations 
compared to ComBat. Qualitative assessments illustrate the desired 
distributional alignment of ADNI-2 with OASIS-3, while quantitative evaluations 
confirm robust performance. This work contributes to the growing field of dMRI 
harmonization, potentially improving the reliability and comparability of 
structural connectivity studies that combine data from different sources in 
neuroscientific and clinical research.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.09.05.611489
PMCID: PMC11418962
PMID: 39314357

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interests B. Fischl is 
an advisor to DeepHealth, a company whose medical pursuits focus on medical 
imaging and measurement technologies. His interests were reviewed and are 
managed by Massachusetts General Hospital and Mass General Brigham in accordance 
with their conflict-of-interest policies. The other authors have nothing to 
disclose.


227. J Pers Med. 2020 Dec 26;11(1):14. doi: 10.3390/jpm11010014.

A Conformation Variant of p53 Combined with Machine Learning Identifies 
Alzheimer Disease in Preclinical and Prodromal Stages.

Abate G(1), Vezzoli M(1), Polito L(2), Guaita A(2), Albani D(3), Marizzoni M(4), 
Garrafa E(1), Marengoni A(5), Forloni G(3), Frisoni GB(6), Cummings JL(7), Memo 
M(1), Uberti D(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, 
25123 Brescia, Italy.
(2)GolgiCenci Foundation, 20081 Abbiategrasso, Italy.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche "Mario 
Negri", 20156 Milan, Italy.
(4)Laboratory of Alzheimer's Neuroimaging and Epidemiology (LANE), IRCCS 
Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, 25125 Brescia, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia, 
Lombardy, 25123 Brescia, Italy.
(6)Memory Clinic, University Hospitals and University of Geneva, 1205 Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(7)Department of Brain Health, School of Integrated Health Sciences, University 
of Nevada Las Vegas (UNLV) and Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain 
Health, Las Vegas, NV 89106, USA.
(8)Molecular Markers Laboratory, IRCCS Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio 
Fatebenefratelli, 25125 Brescia, Italy.

Early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a crucial starting point in 
disease management. Blood-based biomarkers could represent a considerable 
advantage in providing AD-risk information in primary care settings. Here, we 
report new data for a relatively unknown blood-based biomarker that holds 
promise for AD diagnosis. We evaluate a p53-misfolding conformation recognized 
by the antibody 2D3A8, also named Unfolded p53 (U-p532D3A8+), in 375 plasma 
samples derived from InveCe.Ab and PharmaCog/E-ADNI longitudinal studies. A 
machine learning approach is used to combine U-p532D3A8+ plasma levels with 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and apolipoprotein E epsilon-4 (APOEε4) and 
is able to predict AD likelihood risk in InveCe.Ab with an overall 86.67% 
agreement with clinical diagnosis. These algorithms also accurately classify 
(AUC = 0.92) Aβ+-amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment (aMCI) patients who will 
develop AD in PharmaCog/E-ADNI, where subjects were stratified according to 
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) AD markers (Aβ42 and p-Tau). Results support 
U-p532D3A8+ plasma level as a promising additional candidate blood-based 
biomarker for AD.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm11010014
PMCID: PMC7823360
PMID: 33375220

Conflict of interest statement: D.U. and M.Me are co-founders and stakeholders 
of Diadem srl and are co-authors of the patents “Method for early identification 
of Alzheimer’s Disease” MI2003A00179/102003901142126; “Antibody binding a linear 
epitope of p53 and its diagnostic applications” PCT/EP2015/072094/family 15122V. 
All the other authors have no competing interest related to this manuscript.


228. Neuroimage. 2009 Apr 15;45(3):645-55. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.01.004.

Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative: a one-year follow up study using 
tensor-based morphometry correlating degenerative rates, biomarkers and 
cognition.

Leow AD(1), Yanovsky I, Parikshak N, Hua X, Lee S, Toga AW, Jack CR Jr, 
Bernstein MA, Britson PJ, Gunter JL, Ward CP, Borowski B, Shaw LM, Trojanowski 
JQ, Fleisher AS, Harvey D, Kornak J, Schuff N, Alexander GE, Weiner MW, Thompson 
PM; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Department of Neurology, UCLA School of 
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1769, USA. feuillet@ucla.edu

Tensor-based morphometry can recover three-dimensional longitudinal brain 
changes over time by nonlinearly registering baseline to follow-up MRI scans of 
the same subject. Here, we compared the anatomical distribution of longitudinal 
brain structural changes, over 12 months, using a subset of the ADNI dataset 
consisting of 20 patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD), 40 healthy elderly 
controls, and 40 individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Each 
individual longitudinal change map (Jacobian map) was created using an unbiased 
registration technique, and spatially normalized to a geometrically-centered 
average image based on healthy controls. Voxelwise statistical analyses revealed 
regional differences in atrophy rates, and these differences were correlated 
with clinical measures and biomarkers. Consistent with prior studies, we 
detected widespread cerebral atrophy in AD, and a more restricted atrophic 
pattern in MCI. In MCI, temporal lobe atrophy rates were correlated with changes 
in mini-mental state exam (MMSE) scores, clinical dementia rating (CDR), and 
logical/verbal learning memory scores. In AD, temporal atrophy rates were 
correlated with several biomarker indices, including a higher CSF level of p-tau 
protein, and a greater CSF tau/beta amyloid 1-42 (ABeta42) ratio. Temporal lobe 
atrophy was significantly faster in MCI subjects who converted to AD than in 
non-converters. Serial MRI scans can therefore be analyzed with nonlinear image 
registration to relate ongoing neurodegeneration to a variety of pathological 
biomarkers, cognitive changes, and conversion from MCI to AD, tracking disease 
progression in 3-dimensional detail.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.01.004
PMCID: PMC2696624
PMID: 19280686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2019 Apr 16;11(1):33. doi: 10.1186/s13195-019-0487-y.

Personalized risk for clinical progression in cognitively normal subjects-the 
ABIDE project.

van Maurik IS(1)(2), Slot RER(3), Verfaillie SCJ(3), Zwan MD(3), Bouwman FH(3), 
Prins ND(3)(4), Teunissen CE(5), Scheltens P(3), Barkhof F(6)(7), Wattjes MP(6), 
Molinuevo JL(8), Rami L(8), Wolfsgruber S(9)(10), Peters O(11), Jessen F(12), 
Berkhof J(13), van der Flier WM(3)(13); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
i.vanmaurik@vumc.nl.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. i.vanmaurik@vumc.nl.
(3)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Brain Research Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Neurochemistry Laboratory and Biobank, Department of Clinical Chemistry, 
Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije 
Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Institutes of Neurology and Healthcare Engineering, UCL, London, UK.
(8)Alzheimer's Disease and Other Cognitive Disorders Unit, Neurology Service, 
Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain and Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques 
August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Bonn, Bonn, 
Germany.
(10)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Bonn, Germany.
(11)Department of Psychiatry, Charité Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, 
Germany.
(12)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(13)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Biomarkers such as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) have predictive value for progression to dementia in patients with 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI). The pre-dementia stage takes far longer, and 
the interpretation of biomarker findings is particular relevant for individuals 
who present at a memory clinic, but are deemed cognitively normal. The objective 
of the current study is to construct biomarker-based prognostic models for 
personalized risk of clinical progression in cognitively normal individuals 
presenting at a memory clinic.
METHODS: We included 481 individuals with subjective cognitive decline (SCD) 
from the Amsterdam Dementia Cohort. Prognostic models were developed by Cox 
regression with patient characteristics, MRI, and/or CSF biomarkers to predict 
clinical progression to MCI or dementia. We estimated 5- and 3-year 
individualized risks based on patient-specific values. External validation was 
performed on Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and an European 
dataset.
RESULTS: Based on demographics only (Harrell's C = 0.70), 5- and 3-year 
progression risks varied from 6% [3-11] and 4% [2-8] (age 55, MMSE 30) to 38% 
[29-49] and 28% [21-37] (age 70, MMSE 27). Normal CSF biomarkers strongly 
decreased progression probabilities (Harrell's C = 0.82). By contrast, abnormal 
CSF markedly increased risk (5 years, 96% [56-100]; 3 years, 89% [44-99]). The 
CSF model could reclassify 58% of the individuals with an "intermediate" risk 
(35-65%) based on the demographic model. MRI measures were not retained in the 
models.
CONCLUSION: The current study takes the first steps in a personalized approach 
for cognitively normal individuals by providing biomarker-based prognostic 
models.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-019-0487-y
PMCID: PMC6466790
PMID: 30987684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
study was approved by the local Medical Ethical Committee. All patients provided 
written informed consent for their clinical data to be used for research 
purposes. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: Dr. 
Prins serves on the advisory board of Boehringer Ingelheim and Probiodrug and on 
the DSMB of Abbvie’s M15-566 trial. He has provided consultancy services for 
Sanofi, Takeda, and Kyowa Kirin Pharmaceutical Development. NDP is the CEO and 
co-owner of the Alzheimer Research Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. C. 
Teunissen serves on the advisory board of Fujirebio and Roche, received research 
consumables from Euroimmun, IBL, Fujirebio, Invitrogen, and Mesoscale Discovery; 
performed contract research for IBL, Shire, Boehringer, Roche, and Probiodrug; 
and received grants from the European Commission, the Dutch Research Council 
(ZonMW), Association of Frontotemporal Dementia/Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery 
Foundation, ISAO, and the Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation. Dr. Scheltens 
has acquired grant support (for the institution) from GE Healthcare, Danone 
Research, Piramal, and MERCK. In the past 2 years, he has received 
consultancy/speaker fees (paid to the institution) from Lilly, GE Healthcare, 
Novartis, Sanofi, Nutricia, Probiodrug, Biogen, Roche, Avraham, and EIP Pharma. 
Dr. Barkhof serves as a consultant for Biogen-Idec, Janssen Alzheimer 
Immunotherapy, Bayer-Schering, Merck-Serono, Roche, Novartis, Genzume, and 
Sanofi-aventis; has received sponsoring from EU-H2020, NIHR-UCLH, NOW, SMSR, 
TEVA, Novartis, Toshiba; and serves on the editorial boards of Radiology, Brain, 
Neuroradiology, MSJ, and Neurology. Dr. Peters is on scientific advisory boards 
for Roche, Kyowa Kirin, Novartis, Lilly, and Piramal. He has received funding 
for travel or speaker honoraria from GSK, Nutricia, and Merck Serono. He has 
acted as a consultant for Affiris and Roche. He has received research support 
from Affiris, Piramal, BMS, Eli Lilly, Pfizer, Servier, TRX Pharmaceuticals, 
Lundbeck, and Genentech. Dr. Jessen has received consultation board honoraria 
and speakers fees from AC Immune, Lilly, GE Healthcare, Janssen, USB, Schwabe, 
Esai, Pfizer, Novartis, and Roche. He has received a research grant paid to his 
institution from Schwabe. Dr. van der Flier performs contract research for 
Biogen MA Inc. Research programs of W.M.v.d.F. have been funded by ZonMW, NWO, 
EU-FP7, EU-JPND, Alzheimer Nederland, Cardiovasculair Onderzoek Nederland, 
Stichting Dioraphte, Gieskes-Strijbis Fonds, Boehringer Ingelheim, Piramal 
Neuroimaging, Roche BV, Janssen Stellar, and Combinostics. All funding is paid 
to her institution. van Maurik, Slot, Verfaillie, Dr. Zwan, Dr. Bouwman, Dr. 
Wattjes, Dr. Wolfsgruber, and Dr. Berkhof declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


230. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2020 Mar-Apr;17(2):608-622. doi: 
10.1109/TCBB.2018.2870363. Epub 2018 Sep 14.

Gene Expressions, Hippocampal Volume Loss, and MMSE Scores in Computation of 
Progression and Pharmacologic Therapy Effects for Alzheimer's Disease.

Saribudak A, Subick AA, Kim NH, Rutta JA, Uyar MU.

We build personalized relevance parameterization method (prep-ad) based on 
artificial intelligence (ai) techniques to compute Alzheimer's disease (ad) 
progression for patients at the mild cognitive impairment (mci) stage. 
Expressions of ad related genes, mini mental state examination (mmse) scores, 
and hippocampal volume measurements of mci patients are obtained from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (adni) database. In evaluation of 
cognitive changes under pharmacological therapies, patients are grouped based on 
available clinical measurements and the type of therapy administered, namely 
donepezil monotherapy and polytherapy of donepezil with memantine. Average leave 
one out cross validation (loocv) error rates are calculated for prep-ad results 
as less than 8 percent when mmse scores are used to compute disease progression 
for a 60 month period, and 3 percent with hippocampal volume measurements for 12 
months. Statistical significance is calculated as p = 0.003 for using ad related 
genes in disease progression and as for the results computed by prep-ad. These 
relatively small average loocv errors and p-values suggest that our prep-ad 
methods employing gene expressions, mmse scores and hippocampal volume loss 
measurements can be useful in supporting pharmacologic therapy decisions during 
early stages of ad.

DOI: 10.1109/TCBB.2018.2870363
PMCID: PMC7241288
PMID: 31722481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors do not declare 
any conflict of interest.


231. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;80(1):321-330. doi: 10.3233/JAD-201117.

Associations of Vascular Risk with Cognition, Brain Glucose Metabolism, and 
Clinical Progression in Cognitively Intact Elders.

Yu GX(1)(2), Zhang T(3), Hou XH(4), Ou YN(4), Hu H(4), Wang ZT(4), Guo Y(4), Xu 
W(4), Tan L(4), Yu JT(3), Tan L(3)(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Dalian Medical 
University, Dalian, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical 
University, Dalian, China.
(3)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.

BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence supports an important role of vascular risk in 
cognitive decline and dementia.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to examine whether vascular risk was associated with 
cognitive decline, cerebral hypometabolism, and clinical progression in 
cognitively intact elders.
METHODS: Vascular risk was assessed by the Framingham Heart Study general 
Cardiovascular disease (FHS-CVD) risk score. The cross-sectional and 
longitudinal associations of FHS-CVD risk score with cognition and brain glucose 
metabolism were explored using multivariate linear regression and linear mixed 
effects models, respectively. The risk of clinical progression conversion was 
assessed using Kaplan-Meier survival curves and multivariate Cox proportional 
hazard models.
RESULTS: A total of 491 cognitively intact elders were included from Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. Participants with high FHS-CVD 
risk scores had lower baseline Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) (p = 0.009), 
executive function (EF) (p < 0.001), memory function (MEM) (p < 0.001) scores, 
and F18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) uptake 
(p < 0.001) than those with low FHS-CVD risk scores. In longitudinal analyses, 
individuals with higher FHS-CVD risk scores had greater longitudinal declines in 
MMSE (p = 0.043), EF (p = 0.029) scores, and FDG-PET uptake (p = 0.035). 
Besides, individuals with a higher vascular risk had an increased risk of 
clinical progression (p = 0.004).
CONCLUSION: These findings indicated effects of vascular risk on cognitive 
decline, cerebral hypometabolism, and clinical progression. Early detection and 
management of vascular risk factors might be useful in the prevention of 
dementia.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-201117
PMID: 33523005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


232. BMC Neurol. 2020 Apr 21;20(1):148. doi: 10.1186/s12883-020-01728-x.

Predicting MCI progression with FDG-PET and cognitive scores: a longitudinal 
study.

Teng L(1), Li Y(2), Zhao Y(2), Hu T(2), Zhang Z(2), Yao Z(3), Hu B(4); 
Alzheimer’ s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking Union Medical College, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 100032, P.R. China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Wearable Computing of Gansu Province, Lanzhou University, 
Lanzhou, 730000, P.R. China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Wearable Computing of Gansu Province, Lanzhou University, 
Lanzhou, 730000, P.R. China. yaozj@lzu.edu.cn.
(4)Key Laboratory of Wearable Computing of Gansu Province, Lanzhou University, 
Lanzhou, 730000, P.R. China. bh@lzu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is an intermediate stage between 
normal aging and dementia. Studies on MCI progression are important for 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) prevention. 18F fluoro-deoxy-glucose positron emission 
tomography (FDG-PET) has been proven to be a powerful tool for measuring 
cerebral glucose metabolism. In this study, we proposed a classification 
framework for MCI prediction with both baseline and multiple follow-up FDG-PET 
scans as well as cognitive scores of 33 progressive MCI (pMCI) patients and 46 
stable MCI (sMCI) patients from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI).
METHOD: First, PET images were normalized using the Yakushev normalization 
procedure and registered to the Brainnetome Atlas (BNA). The average metabolic 
intensities of brain regions were defined as static features. Dynamic features 
were the intensity variation between baseline and the other three time points 
and change ratios with the intensity obtained at baseline considered as 
reference. Mini-mental State Examination (MMSE) scores and Alzheimer's disease 
Assessment Scale-Cognitive section (ADAS-cog) scores of each time point were 
collected as cognitive features. And F-score was applied for feature selection. 
Finally, support vector machine (SVM) with radial basis function (RBF) kernel 
was used for the three above features.
RESULTS: Dynamic features showed the best classification performance in accuracy 
of 88.61% than static features (accuracy of 78.48%). And the combination of 
cognitive features and dynamic features improved the classification performance 
in specificity of 95.65% and Area Under Curve (AUC) of 0.9308.
CONCLUSION: Our results reported that dynamic features are more representative 
in longitudinal research for MCI prediction work. And dynamic features and 
cognitive scores complementarily enhance the classification performance in 
specificity and AUC. These findings may predict the disease course and clinical 
changes in individuals with mild cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.1186/s12883-020-01728-x
PMCID: PMC7171825
PMID: 32316912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


233. Brain Behav. 2011 Nov;1(2):142-52. doi: 10.1002/brb3.19.

Residual vectors for Alzheimer disease diagnosis and prognostication.

Clark DG; Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Alzheimer disease (AD) is an increasingly prevalent neurodegenerative condition 
and a looming socioeconomic threat. A biomarker for the disease could make the 
process of diagnosis easier and more accurate, and accelerate drug discovery. 
The current work describes a method for scoring brain images that is inspired by 
fundamental principles from information retrieval (IR), a branch of computer 
science that includes the development of Internet search engines. For this 
research, a dataset of 254 baseline 18-F fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission 
tomography (FDG-PET) scans was obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). For a given contrast, a subset of scans (nine of 
every 10) was used to compute a residual vector that typified the difference, at 
each voxel, between the two groups being contrasted. Scans that were not used 
for computing the residual vector (the remaining one of 10 scans) were then 
compared to the residual vector using a cosine similarity metric. This process 
was repeated sequentially, each time generating cosine similarity scores on 10% 
of the FDG-PET scans for each contrast. Statistical analysis revealed that the 
scores were significant predictors of functional decline as measured by the 
Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ). When logistic regression models that 
incorporated these scores were evaluated with leave-one-out cross-validation, 
cognitively normal controls were discerned from AD with sensitivity and 
specificity of 94.4% and 84.8%, respectively. Patients who converted from mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) to AD were discerned from MCI nonconverters with 
sensitivity and specificity of 89.7% and 62.9%, respectively, when FAQ scores 
were brought into the model. Residual vectors are easy to compute and provide a 
simple method for scoring the similarity between an FDG-PET scan and sets of 
examples from a given diagnostic group. The method is readily generalizable to 
any imaging modality. Further interdisciplinary work between IR and clinical 
neuroscience is warranted.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.19
PMCID: PMC3236543
PMID: 22399094


234. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;56(3):947-957. doi: 10.3233/JAD-160716.

Does the Female Advantage in Verbal Memory Contribute to Underestimating 
Alzheimer's Disease Pathology in Women versus Men?

Sundermann EE(1), Biegon A(2), Rubin LH(3), Lipton RB(1), Landau S(4), Maki 
PM(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, State University of New York, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 
USA.
(4)Einstein Aging Study and the Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.

There is a growing recognition of sex differences in Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
Females show an advantage over males on tests of verbal memory, which are used 
to diagnose AD and its precursor, amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI). 
Women retain this advantage in aMCI despite reduced hippocampal volume and 
temporal lobe glucose metabolism. Here we examined whether this female advantage 
endures despite evidence of AD-specific pathology, cortical amyloid-β (Aβ) 
deposition measured with [18F]AV45 (florbetapir) positron emission tomography. 
Participants with normal cognition (N = 304), aMCI (N = 515), and AD dementia 
(N = 175) were drawn from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI). Across and within diagnostic groups, we conducted linear regressions to 
examine the interaction of sex with cortical Aβ burden on immediate and delayed 
recall on the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT) adjusting for age, 
education, and APOE4. In the overall group, sex by cortical Aβ interaction was 
significant for delayed recall only. Overall, delayed recall performance was 
significantly better in women versus men among those with low to moderate Aβ 
burden, but women and men performed similarly among those with high Aβ burden. 
In diagnosis-stratified analyses, a significant sex by cortical Aβ interaction 
was observed for delayed recall in the aMCI group, but not in the normal or AD 
dementia groups. Thus, women maintain a verbal memory advantage over men in aMCI 
despite similar levels of AD pathology. Although this advantage may benefit 
women by delaying verbal memory impairment until more advanced pathology, it may 
also delay diagnosis of aMCI and treatment intervention.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-160716
PMCID: PMC7644197
PMID: 28106548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Dr. Sundermann reports no 
disclosures. Dr. Maki reports no disclosures. Dr. Rubin reports no disclosures. 
Dr. Lipton reports research support from the NIH: PO1 AG003949 (Program 
Director), PO1AG027734 (Project Leader), RO1AG025119 (Investigator), 
RO1AG022374–06A2 (Investigator), RO1AG034119 (Investigator), RO1AG12101 
(Investigator) and has reviewed for the NIA and NINDS, Dr. Landau reports no 
disclosures. Dr. Biegon reports no disclosures.


235. J Neuroimaging. 2015 Sep-Oct;25(5):728-37. doi: 10.1111/jon.12252. Epub 2015 May 
4.

Structural Brain Changes in Early-Onset Alzheimer's Disease Subjects Using the 
LONI Pipeline Environment.

Moon SW(1), Dinov ID(2)(3), Hobel S(2), Zamanyan A(2), Choi YC(4), Shi R(2), 
Thompson PM(2), Toga AW(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Konkuk University School of Medicine, Seoul, 
143-701, Korea.
(2)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Institute for Neuroimaging and Informatics, Keck 
School of Medicine of USC, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 
90032.
(3)University of Michigan, School of Nursing, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109.
(4)Department of Radiology, Konkuk University School of Medicine, Seoul, 
143-701, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: This study investigates 36 subjects aged 55-65 from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database to expand our 
knowledge of early-onset (EO) Alzheimer's Disease (EO-AD) using neuroimaging 
biomarkers.
METHODS: Nine of the subjects had EO-AD, and 27 had EO mild cognitive impairment 
(EO-MCI). The structural ADNI data were parcellated using BrainParser, and the 
15 most discriminating neuroimaging markers between the two cohorts were 
extracted using the Global Shape Analysis (GSA) Pipeline workflow. Then the 
Local Shape Analysis (LSA) Pipeline workflow was used to conduct local 
(per-vertex) post-hoc statistical analyses of the shape differences based on the 
participants' diagnoses (EO-MCI+EO-AD). Tensor-based Morphometry (TBM) and 
multivariate regression models were used to identify the significance of the 
structural brain differences based on the participants' diagnoses.
RESULTS: The significant between-group regional differences using GSA were found 
in 15 neuroimaging markers. The results of the LSA analysis workflow were based 
on the subject diagnosis, age, years of education, apolipoprotein E (ε4), 
Mini-Mental State Examination, visiting times, and logical memory as regressors. 
All the variables had significant effects on the regional shape measures. Some 
of these effects survived the false discovery rate (FDR) correction. Similarly, 
the TBM analysis showed significant effects on the Jacobian displacement vector 
fields, but these effects were reduced after FDR correction.
CONCLUSIONS: These results may explain some of the differences between EO-AD and 
EO-MCI, and some of the characteristics of the EO cognitive impairment subjects.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Neuroimaging.

DOI: 10.1111/jon.12252
PMCID: PMC4537660
PMID: 25940587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Jan 25;13:774804. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.774804. 
eCollection 2021.

Development of a Sex-Specific Risk Scoring System for the Prediction of 
Cognitively Normal People to Patients With Mild Cognitive Impairment 
(SRSS-CNMCI).

Luo W(1)(2), Wen H(3), Ge S(2)(4), Tang C(2)(4), Liu X(1), Lu L(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Information Engineering, Guangzhou University of Chinese 
Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Evidence-Based Medicine and Data Science Centre, Guangzhou University of 
Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)South China Research Center for Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Medical College 
of Acu-Moxi and Rehabilitation, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, 
Guangzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to develop a sex-specific risk scoring system, abbreviated 
as SRSS-CNMCI, for the prediction of the conversion of cognitively normal (CN) 
people into patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) to provide a reliable 
tool for the prevention of MCI.
METHODS: CN at baseline participants 61-90 years of age were selected from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database with at least one 
follow-up. Multivariable Cox proportional hazards models were used to identify 
the major risk factors associated with the conversion from CN to MCI and to 
develop the SRSS-CNMCI. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis 
was used to determine risk cutoff points corresponding to an optimal prediction. 
The results were externally validated, including evaluation of the 
discrimination and calibration in the Harvard Aging Brain Study (HABS) database.
RESULTS: A total of 471 participants, including 240 female (51%) and 231 male 
participants (49%) aged from 61 to 90 years, were included in the study cohort. 
The final multivariable models and the SRSS-CNMCI included age, APOE e4, mini 
mental state examination (MMSE) and clinical dementia rating (CDR). The 
C-statistics of the SRSS-CNMCI were 0.902 in the female subgroup and 0.911 in 
the male subgroup. The cutoff point of high and low risks was 33% in the female 
subgroup, indicating that more than 33% female participants were considered to 
have a high risk, and more than 9% participants were considered to have a high 
risk in the male subgroup. The SRSS-CNMCI performed well in the external cohort: 
the C-statistics were 0.950 in the female subgroup and 0.965 in the male 
subgroup.
CONCLUSION: The SRSS-CNMCI performs well in various cohorts and provides an 
accurate prediction and a generalization.

Copyright © 2022 Luo, Wen, Ge, Tang, Liu and Lu.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.774804
PMCID: PMC8823413
PMID: 35145390

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


237. Brain Commun. 2021 Sep 1;3(3):fcab199. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab199. 
eCollection 2021.

Subjective cognitive decline: opposite links to neurodegeneration across the 
Alzheimer's continuum.

Kuhn E(1), Perrotin A(2), Tomadesso C(1), André C(1), Sherif S(1), Bejanin A(1), 
Touron E(1), Landeau B(1), Mezenge F(1), Vivien D(1), De La Sayette V(2), 
Chételat G(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, INSERM, U1237, PhIND "Physiopathology and Imaging of 
Neurological Disorders", Institut Blood and Brain @ Caen-Normandie, Cyceron, 
14000 Caen, France.
(2)Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, PSL Université, EPHE, INSERM, U1077, CHU de Caen, 
GIP Cyceron, NIMH, 14000 Caen, France.

Subjective memory decline is associated with neurodegeneration and increased 
risk of cognitive decline in participants with no or subjective cognitive 
impairment, while in patients with mild cognitive impairment or Alzheimer's-type 
dementia, findings are inconsistent. Our aim was to provide a comprehensive 
overview of subjective memory decline changes, relative to objective memory 
performances, and of their relationships with neurodegeneration, across the 
clinical continuum of Alzheimer's disease. Two hundred participants from the 
Imagerie Multimodale de la maladie d'Alzheimer à un stade Précoce (IMAP+) 
primary cohort and 731 participants from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) replication cohort were included. They were divided into four 
clinical groups (Imagerie Multimodale de la maladie d'Alzheimer à un stade 
Précoce/Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative): controls (n = 67/147, age: 
60-84/60-90, female: 54/55%), patients with subjective cognitive decline 
(n = 30/84, age: 54-84/65-80, female: 44/63%), mild cognitive impairment 
(n = 50/369, age: 58-86/55-88, female: 45/44%) or Alzheimer's-type dementia 
(n = 36/121, age: 51-86/61-90, female: 41/41%). Subjective and objective memory 
scores, and their difference (i.e. delta score reflecting memory awareness), 
were compared between groups. Then, voxelwise relationships between subjective 
memory decline and neuroimaging measures of neurodegeneration [atrophy (T1-MRI) 
and hypometabolism (18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-PET)] were assessed across clinical 
groups and the interactive effect of the level of cognitive impairment within 
the entire sample was assessed. Analyses were adjusted for age, sex and 
education, and repeated including only the amyloid-positive participants. In 
Imagerie Multimodale de la maladie d'Alzheimer à un stade Précoce, the level of 
subjective memory decline was higher in all patient groups (all P < 0.001) 
relative to controls, but similar between patient groups. In contrast, objective 
memory deficits progressively worsened from the subjective cognitive decline to 
the dementia group (all P < 0.001). Accordingly, the delta score showed a 
progressive decline in memory awareness across clinical groups (all P < 0.001). 
Voxelwise analyses revealed opposite relationships between the subjective memory 
decline score and neurodegeneration across the clinical continuum. In the 
earliest stages (i.e. patients with subjective cognitive decline or Mini Mental 
State Examination > 28), greater subjective memory decline was associated with 
increased neurodegeneration, while in later stages (i.e. patients with mild 
cognitive impairment, dementia or Mini Mental State Examination < 27) a lower 
score was related to more neurodegeneration. Similar findings were recovered in 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative replication cohort, with slight 
differences according to the clinical group, and in the amyloid-positive 
subsamples. Altogether, our findings suggest that the subjective memory decline 
score should be interpreted differently from normal cognition to dementia. 
Higher scores might reflect greater neurodegeneration in earliest stages, while 
in more advanced stages lower scores might reflect decreased memory awareness, 
i.e. more anosognosia associated with advanced neurodegeneration.

© The Author(s) (2021). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab199
PMCID: PMC8421692
PMID: 34704027


238. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2022 Jul 11;14(1):93. doi: 10.1186/s13195-022-01035-2.

The impact of subthreshold levels of amyloid deposition on conversion to 
dementia in patients with amyloid-negative amnestic mild cognitive impairment.

Kim HJ(1)(2), Oh JS(3), Lim JS(1), Lee S(1), Jo S(1), Chung EN(4), Shim 
WH(4)(5), Oh M(3), Kim JS(3), Roh JH(6), Lee JH(7); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan 
Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Neurology, Uijeongbu Eulji Medical Center, Eulji University 
School of Medicine, Uijeongbu, South Korea.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan 
Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea.
(4)Health Innovation Bigdata Center, Asan Institute for Lifesciences, Department 
of Radiology and Research Institute of Radiology, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea.
(5)Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea.
(6)Neuroscience Institute, Korea University College of Medicine and School of 
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(7)Department of Neurology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan 
Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea. jhlee@amc.seoul.kr.

BACKGROUND: About 40-50% of patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) are found to have no significant Alzheimer's pathology based on amyloid 
PET positivity. Notably, conversion to dementia in this population is known to 
occur much less often than in amyloid-positive MCI. However, the relationship 
between MCI and brain amyloid deposition remains largely unknown. Therefore, we 
investigated the influence of subthreshold levels of amyloid deposition on 
conversion to dementia in amnestic MCI patients with negative amyloid PET scans.
METHODS: This study was a retrospective cohort study of patients with 
amyloid-negative amnestic MCI who visited the memory clinic of Asan Medical 
Center. All participants underwent detailed neuropsychological testing, brain 
magnetic resonance imaging, and [18F]-florbetaben (FBB) positron emission 
tomography scan (PET). Conversion to dementia was determined by a neurologist 
based on a clinical interview with a detailed neuropsychological test or a 
decline in the Korean version of the Mini-Mental State Examination score of more 
than 4 points per year combined with impaired activities of daily living. 
Regional cortical amyloid levels were calculated, and a receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) curve for conversion to dementia was obtained. To increase 
the reliability of the results of the study, we analyzed the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset together.
RESULTS: During the follow-up period, 36% (39/107) of patients converted to 
dementia from amnestic MCI. The dementia converter group displayed increased 
standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) values of FBB on PET in the bilateral 
temporal, parietal, posterior cingulate, occipital, and left precuneus cortices 
as well as increased global SUVR. Among volume of interests, the left parietal 
SUVR predicted conversion to dementia with the highest accuracy in the ROC 
analysis (area under the curve [AUC] = 0.762, P < 0.001). The combination of 
precuneus, parietal cortex, and FBB composite SUVRs also showed a higher 
accuracy in predicting conversion to dementia than other models (AUC = 0.763). 
Of the results of ADNI data, the SUVR of the left precuneus SUVR showed the 
highest AUC (AUC = 0.596, P = 0.006).
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that subthreshold amyloid levels may contribute 
to conversion to dementia in patients with amyloid-negative amnestic MCI.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-022-01035-2
PMCID: PMC9277922
PMID: 35821150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


239. Alzheimers Dement (Amst). 2017 Apr 23;8:86-95. doi: 10.1016/j.dadm.2017.04.004. 
eCollection 2017.

Single-nucleotide polymorphisms are associated with cognitive decline at 
Alzheimer's disease conversion within mild cognitive impairment patients.

Lee E(1), Giovanello KS(2)(3), Saykin AJ(4)(5), Xie F(6), Kong D(7), Wang Y(8), 
Yang L(9), Ibrahim JG(8), Doraiswamy PM(10)(11), Zhu H(8)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(3)Biomedical Research Imaging Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(5)Indiana Alzheimer Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(6)School of Mathematical Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China.
(7)Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(8)Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(9)Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(10)Department of Psychiatry, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(11)Duke Institute for Brain Sciences, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(12)Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The growing public threat of Alzheimer's disease (AD) has raised 
the urgency to quantify the degree of cognitive decline during the conversion 
process of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to AD and its underlying genetic 
pathway. The aim of this article was to test genetic common variants associated 
with accelerated cognitive decline after the conversion of MCI to AD.
METHODS: In 583 subjects with MCI enrolled in the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI; ADNI-1, ADNI-Go, and ADNI-2), 245 MCI 
participants converted to AD at follow-up. We tested the interaction effects 
between individual single-nucleotide polymorphisms and AD diagnosis trajectory 
on the longitudinal Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognition scores.
RESULTS: Our findings reveal six genes, including BDH1, ST6GAL1, RAB20, PDS5B, 
ADARB2, and SPSB1, which are directly or indirectly related to MCI conversion to 
AD.
DISCUSSION: This genome-wide association study sheds light on a genetic 
mechanism of longitudinal cognitive changes during the transition period from 
MCI to AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dadm.2017.04.004
PMCID: PMC5440281
PMID: 28560309


240. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;40(3):587-94. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2014-131343.

Biomarkers for predicting cognitive decline in those with normal cognition.

Steenland K(1), Zhao L(2), Goldstein F(3), Cellar J(3), Lah J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory 
University, Atlanta, GA, USA Emory Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Emory 
University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory 
University, Atlanta, GA, USA Emory Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Emory 
University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 
USA Emory Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 
USA.

Most studies evaluating Alzheimer's disease (AD) biomarkers longitudinally have 
studied patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) who progress to AD; data 
on normal subjects are scarce. We studied which biomarkers best predict 
cognitive decline on the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale 
(ADAS-Cog) among those with normal cognition at baseline, and derived cut points 
to predict decline. We studied 191 subjects in the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) who had normal cognition at baseline, 2 + visits 
(mean follow-up 3.1 years), and data on neuropsychological tests, cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) biomarkers, and structural MRI. We used repeated measures linear 
regression of log ADAS-Cog on age, race, gender, education, APOE4 status, 
baseline biomarker values, and follow-up time; an interaction between biomarker 
and time assessed predictive power. Neuropsychological tests did not 
significantly predict ADAS-Cog decline, while both MRI variables and CSF 
biomarkers did; CSF markers were the strongest predictors. Optimal cut points 
for baseline CSF markers to distinguish decliners were < 220 pg/ml (Aβ42), ≥61 
pg/ml (t-tau), ≥21 pg/ml (p-tau), ≥0.31 (t-tau/Aβ42), and ≥0.10 (p-tau/Aβ42). 
For progression to MCI/AD (n = 28), the best markers were t-tau, t-tau/Aβ42, and 
p-tau/Aβ42, with optimal cut points of 58, 0.31, and 0.08, respectively. The 
optimal cut points across all markers and cut points predicted decline in 
ADAS-Cog, as well as transition to MCI, with a 65% accuracy. Our findings 
support current models of AD progression and suggest it is feasible to establish 
biomarker criteria to predict cognitive decline in individuals with normal 
cognition. Larger studies will be needed to more accurately characterize optimal 
cut points.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2014-131343
PMCID: PMC4462517
PMID: 24496071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2020 Mar 20;6(1):e12007. doi: 10.1002/trc2.12007. 
eCollection 2020.

Effect of apolipoprotein E ε4 allele on the progression of cognitive decline in 
the early stage of Alzheimer's disease.

Suzuki K(1), Hirakawa A(2), Ihara R(1), Iwata A(3), Ishii K(4), Ikeuchi T(5), 
Sun CK(6), Donohue M(6), Iwatsubo T(1)(7); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative, Japanese Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Unit for Early and Exploratory Clinical Development The University of Tokyo 
Hospital Tokyo Japan.
(2)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Graduate School of Medicine 
The University of Tokyo Tokyo Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology The University of Tokyo Hospital Tokyo Japan.
(4)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology Tokyo Japan.
(5)Niigata University Niigata Japan.
(6)Alzheimer's Therapeutics Research Institute University of Southern California 
San Diego California.
(7)Department of Neuropathology Graduate School of Medicine The University of 
Tokyo Tokyo Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Possession of the apolipoprotein E (APO E) ε4 allele advances 
amyloid β (Aβ) deposition and symptomatic onset of Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
whereas its effect on the rate of cognitive decline remained controversial. We 
examined the effects of APOE ε4 allele on cognition in biomarker-confirmed late 
mild cognitive impairment (LMCI) and mild AD subjects in the Japanese 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (J-ADNI) and North American ADNI 
(NA-ADNI).
METHODS: The "early AD" (ie, combined LMCI and mild AD) cohort of 649 subjects 
from J-ADNI and NA-ADNI were selected based on positivity of Aβ confirmed by 
amyloid positron emission tomography (PET) or cerebrospinal fluid testing. The 
rates of cognitive decline in the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), the 
Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB), and the Alzheimer's Disease 
Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale 13 (ADAS-Cog) from baseline were examined 
using mixed-effects model. The effect of ε4 on time to conversion to dementia 
was also analyzed in LMCI using the Kaplan-Meier estimator and log-rank test.
RESULTS: The rates of cognitive decline were not significantly different between 
ε4 carriers and ε4 non-carriers in the total early AD cohort, which were 
affected neither by region nor by the number of ε4 alleles. In LMCI, ε4 carriers 
showed almost the same progression rates as ε4 non-carriers, except for a 
significantly faster decline in MMSE (P = .0282). Time to conversion to demenita 
was not significantly different between ε4 carriers and ε4 non-carriers. In 
ε4-positive mild AD, the rates of decline in MMSE (P = .003) and CDR-SB 
(P = .0071) were slower than those in ε4 non-carriers.
DISCUSSION: The APOE ε4 allele had little effect on the rates of cognitive 
decline in the overall biomarker-confirmed early AD, regardless of region and 
number of ε4 alleles, with a slight variability in different clinical stages, 
the ε4 allele being slightly accelerative in LMCI, while decelerative in mild 
AD.

© 2020 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical 
Interventions published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of Alzheimer's 
Association.

DOI: 10.1002/trc2.12007
PMCID: PMC7087431
PMID: 32211510


242. Lancet Neurol. 2019 Nov;18(11):1034-1044. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30283-2. 
Epub 2019 Sep 13.

Biomarker-based prognosis for people with mild cognitive impairment (ABIDE): a 
modelling study.

van Maurik IS(1), Vos SJ(2), Bos I(3), Bouwman FH(4), Teunissen CE(5), Scheltens 
P(4), Barkhof F(6), Frolich L(7), Kornhuber J(8), Wiltfang J(9), Maier W(10), 
Peters O(11), Rüther E(12), Nobili F(13), Frisoni GB(14), Spiru L(15), 
Freund-Levi Y(16), Wallin AK(17), Hampel H(18), Soininen H(19), Tsolaki M(20), 
Verhey F(2), Kłoszewska I(21), Mecocci P(22), Vellas B(23), Lovestone S(24), 
Galluzzi S(25), Herukka SK(19), Santana I(26), Baldeiras I(26), de Mendonça 
A(27), Silva D(28), Chetelat G(29), Egret S(29), Palmqvist S(30), Hansson O(31), 
Visser PJ(3), Berkhof J(32), van der Flier WM(33); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Department 
of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands. Electronic address: i.vanmaurik@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, Maastricht University, School 
for Mental Health and Neuroscience, Alzheimer Centre Limburg, Maastricht, 
Netherlands.
(3)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Department 
of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, Maastricht University, School for Mental 
Health and Neuroscience, Alzheimer Centre Limburg, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(4)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(5)Neurochemistry Laboratory, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Amsterdam 
Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije 
Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Institutes of 
Neurology and Healthcare Engineering, University College London, London, UK.
(7)Department of Geriatric Psychiatry, Zentralinstitut für Seelische Gesundheit, 
Medical Faculty Mannheim University of Heidelberg, Germany.
(8)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Friedrich-Alexander University of 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(9)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center, 
Georg-August-University, Göttingen, Germany; German Center for Neurodegenerative 
Diseases, Göttingen, Germany; iBiMED, Medical Sciences Department, University of 
Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal.
(10)Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases and Gerotopsychiatry, University of 
Bonn, German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Bonn, Germany.
(11)Department of Psychiatry, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate 
member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin 
Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany; German Center for Neurodegenerative 
Diseases, Berlin, Germany.
(12)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Göttingen, 
Göttingen, Germany.
(13)Clinical Neurology, Department of Neurosciences, University of Genoa, Genoa, 
Italy; Neurology Department, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, 
Italy.
(14)Memory Clinic, University Hospital and University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(15)Geriatrics, Gerontology and Old Age Psychiatry Clinical Department, Carol 
Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy-"Elias" Emergency Clinical Hospital, 
Bucharest, Romania; Memory Clinic and Longevity Medicine, Ana Aslan 
International Foundation, Romania.
(16)School of Medical Sciences, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden; Department of 
Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Division of Clinical Geriatrics, 
Karolinska Institutet Center for Alzheimer Research, Stockholm, Sweden; 
Department of Old Age Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College 
London, London, UK.
(17)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Malmö, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.
(18)Alzheimer Precision Medicine, GRC 21, Sorbonne University, AP-HP, 
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France; Eisai, Neurology Business Group, 
Woodcliff Lake, NJ, USA.
(19)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Neurology, University of Eastern Finland and 
Neurocenter, Neurology, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.
(20)1st Department of Neurology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Memory 
and Dementia Center, "AHEPA" General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(21)Department of Geriatric Psychiatry and Psychotic Disorders, Medical 
University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(22)Institute of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Department of Medicine, University 
of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(23)UMR INSERM 1027, CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(24)Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(25)Lab Alzheimer's Neuroimaging and Epidemiology, IRCCS San Giovanni di Dio 
Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy.
(26)Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal; Department of Neurology, Centro Hospitalar e 
Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(27)Faculty of Medicine, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.
(28)Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal; 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal; Centre for 
Biomedical Research, Universidade do Algarve, Faro, Portugal.
(29)Université Normandie, Inserm, Université de Caen-Normandie, Inserm UMR-S 
U1237, GIP Cyceron, Caen, France.
(30)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Malmö, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden; Department of Neurology, Skåne University Hospital, 
Lund, Sweden.
(31)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Malmö, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden; Memory Clinic, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, 
Sweden.
(32)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(33)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Department 
of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2019 Nov;18(11):985-987. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30353-9.

BACKGROUND: Biomarker-based risk predictions of dementia in people with mild 
cognitive impairment are highly relevant for care planning and to select 
patients for treatment when disease-modifying drugs become available. We aimed 
to establish robust prediction models of disease progression in people at risk 
of dementia.
METHODS: In this modelling study, we included people with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) from single-centre and multicentre cohorts in Europe and North 
America: the European Medical Information Framework for Alzheimer's Disease 
(EMIF-AD; n=883), Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI; n=829), 
Amsterdam Dementia Cohort (ADC; n=666), and the Swedish BioFINDER study (n=233). 
Inclusion criteria were a baseline diagnosis of MCI, at least 6 months of 
follow-up, and availability of a baseline Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
and MRI or CSF biomarker assessment. The primary endpoint was clinical 
progression to any type of dementia. We evaluated performance of previously 
developed risk prediction models-a demographics model, a hippocampal volume 
model, and a CSF biomarkers model-by evaluating them across cohorts, 
incorporating different biomarker measurement methods, and determining 
prognostic performance with Harrell's C statistic. We then updated the models by 
re-estimating parameters with and without centre-specific effects and evaluated 
model calibration by comparing observed and expected survival. Finally, we 
constructed a model combining markers for amyloid deposition, tauopathy, and 
neurodegeneration (ATN), in accordance with the National Institute on Aging and 
Alzheimer's Association research framework.
FINDINGS: We included all 2611 individuals with MCI in the four cohorts, 1007 
(39%) of whom progressed to dementia. The validated demographics model 
(Harrell's C 0·62, 95% CI 0·59-0·65), validated hippocampal volume model (0·67, 
0·62-0·72), and updated CSF biomarkers model (0·72, 0·68-0·74) had adequate 
prognostic performance across cohorts and were well calibrated. The newly 
constructed ATN model had the highest performance (0·74, 0·71-0·76).
INTERPRETATION: We generated risk models that are robust across cohorts, which 
adds to their potential clinical applicability. The models could aid clinicians 
in the interpretation of CSF biomarker and hippocampal volume results in 
individuals with MCI, and help research and clinical settings to prepare for a 
future of precision medicine in Alzheimer's disease. Future research should 
focus on the clinical utility of the models, particularly if their use affects 
participants' understanding, emotional wellbeing, and behaviour.
FUNDING: ZonMW-Memorabel.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30283-2
PMID: 31526625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Racial Ethn Health Disparities. 2024 Feb;11(1):81-91. doi: 
10.1007/s40615-022-01499-w. Epub 2022 Dec 28.

Intersectional Effects of Race and Educational Attainment on Memory Function of 
Middle-Aged and Older Adults With Alzheimer's Disease.

Rahmani A(1), Najand B(1), Sonnega A(2), Akhlaghipour G(1), Mendez MF(3)(4), 
Assari S(5)(6)(7); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Marginalized-Related Diminished Returns (MDRs) Research Center, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(2)Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry & Biobehavioral Sciences, University of California 
Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)Marginalized-Related Diminished Returns (MDRs) Research Center, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA. assari@umich.edu.
(6)Department of Family Medicine, Charles R Drew University of Medicine and 
Science, Los Angeles, CA, USA. assari@umich.edu.
(7)Department of Urban Public Health, Charles R Drew University of Medicine and 
Science, Los Angeles, CA, USA. assari@umich.edu.

BACKGROUND: High educational attainment may protect individuals, particularly 
middle-aged and older adults, against a wide range of health risks, including 
memory decline with age; however, this protection is less clear in patients with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). In addition, this effect may differ across racial 
groups. According to the Marginalized-Related Diminished Return (MDR) theory, 
for example, the protective effect of high educational attainment on mental and 
physical health shows a weaker protective effect for racial minority groups, 
particularly Black people compared to White individuals.
OBJECTIVES: This longitudinal study used data of middle-aged and older adults 
with AD with two aims: first, to test the association between educational 
attainment and memory, and second, to explore racial differences in this 
association in the USA.
METHODS: Data came from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
study. The total sample was 1673 American middle-aged and older adults. The 
independent variable was educational attainment measured as years of education. 
The main outcome was memory operationalized as Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test 
(RAVLT) Verbal Forgetting percentage (VF%). Age, gender, and follow-up duration 
were covariates. Race was the effect modifier. Linear regression model was 
utilized to analyze the data.
RESULTS: Of all participants, 68 (4.1%) were Black, and the remaining were 
White, with a mean age of 75 years old. In the pooled sample, educational 
attainment did not show a significant association with memory, independent of 
confounders. Educational attainment showed a significant interaction with race 
on memory, with higher educational attainment having a different effect on 
memory in White patients compared to Black patients.
CONCLUSION: The effect of higher educational attainment on memory differs for 
Black patients with AD compared to White patients. To prevent cognitive 
disparities by race, we need to go beyond racial inequality in access to 
resources (e.g., education) and minimize diminished returns of educational 
attainment for racial minorities. To tackle health inequalities, social policies 
should not be limited to equalizing socioeconomic status but also help minority 
groups leverage their available resources, such as educational attainment, and 
secure tangible outcomes.

© 2022. W. Montague Cobb-NMA Health Institute.

DOI: 10.1007/s40615-022-01499-w
PMID: 36576695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;58(2):425-434. doi: 10.3233/JAD-161227.

Functional Reserve: Experience Participating in Instrumental Activities of Daily 
Living is Associated with Gender and Functional Independence in Mild Cognitive 
Impairment.

Berezuk C(1), Zakzanis KK(1)(2), Ramirez J(3)(4)(5), Ruocco AC(1)(2), Edwards 
JD(3)(4)(5), Callahan BL(3)(4), Black SE(3)(4)(5)(6); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Department of Psychological Clinical Science, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Scarborough, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(3)LC Campbell Cognitive Neurology Research Unit, Sunnybrook Heath Sciences 
Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Hurvitz Brain Sciences Program, Sunnybrook Research Institute, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Canadian Partnership for Stroke Recovery, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)Institute of Medical Science, Faculty of Medicine (Neurology), University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Gender differences in instrumental activities of daily living 
(IADLs) in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease may be 
explained by gender differences in IADL involvement.
OBJECTIVE: We introduce a novel theoretical construct, termed functional 
reserve, and empirically examine gender differences in IADL experience as a 
proxy of this reserve.
METHODS: We cross-sectionally examined men (n = 502) and women (n = 340) with 
MCI from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Demographic 
factors, depressive symptoms, neuropsychological scores, and IADL experience 
were included as independent variables and total Functional Activities 
Questionnaire (FAQ) scores as the dependent variable. Regression analyses were 
performed on the full cohort and stratified by gender to identify differential 
predictive relationships for men and women.
RESULTS: Gender was associated with total FAQ (p < 0.05) until adjusting for 
IADL experience. Furthermore, the combination of cognitive measures accounted 
for the most variance in functional dependence (12% explained, p < 0.001), 
although IADL experience was the most important single variable (4.8% explained, 
p < 0.001). Stratification by gender revealed that IADL experience accounted for 
6.6% of the variance in FAQ score in men (p < 0.001) but only 2.4% in women 
(p = 0.001); however, the interaction between gender and experience was not 
statistically significant.
DISCUSSION: A small effect of men showing greater functional dependence in MCI 
may be explained by lower IADL experience. Additionally, IADL experience was 
associated with superior functioning in all analyses, potentially through 
increased functional reserve. This concept of functional reserve may have 
implications for identifying individuals at risk for IADL dependence, preventing 
or delaying decline, and potentially treating functional impairment.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-161227
PMID: 28453478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2019 Dec;6(12):2448-2459. doi: 10.1002/acn3.50938. Epub 
2019 Nov 13.

Study partner-reported decline identifies cognitive decline and dementia risk.

Nosheny RL(1)(2), Jin C(3), Neuhaus J(3), Insel PS(2), Mackin RS(1)(2), Weiner 
MW(2)(4); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative investigators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California.
(2)San Francisco Veteran's Administration Medical Center, San Francisco, 
California.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(4)Department of Radiology & Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California.

OBJECTIVE: Identifying individuals at risk for cognitive decline, Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (MCI), and dementia due to Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a critical 
need. Functional decline is associated with risk and can be efficiently assessed 
by participants and study partners (SPs). We tested the hypothesis that 
SP-reported functional decline is an independent predictor of dementia risk and 
cognitive decline.
METHODS: In 1048 older adults in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI), we measured associations between Everyday Cognition Scale scores (ECog, 
self- and SP-reported versions) and (1) baseline and longitudinal change in 
neuropsychological test (NPT scores) across multiple cognitive domains; (2) 
diagnostic conversion to MCI or dementia. Models included Mini Mental Status 
Exam (MMSE) score and ApoE ε4 genotype (APOE) as predictors. Model fits were 
compared with and without predictors of interest included.
RESULTS: SP-reported ECog was the strongest predictor of cognitive decline 
across multiple domains, as well as diagnostic conversion. Self-reported ECog 
was associated with baseline NPT scores in some cognitive domains, and 
diagnostic conversion to MCI in participants with biomarker evidence for AD 
(elevated brain β-amyloid, Aβ). Models including SP-reported ECog were 
significantly stronger at predicting outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: SP-reported functional decline is an independent indicator of 
cognitive decline and dementia risk, even when accounting for cognitive 
screening, genetic risk, demographics, and self-report decline. The results 
provide a rationale for greater utilization of SP-reported functional decline to 
identify those at risk for dementia due to AD and other causes.

© 2019 The Authors. Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology published by 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc on behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/acn3.50938
PMCID: PMC6917311
PMID: 31721455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RLN, JN, PSI, JN, and RSM have no potential 
conflicts of interest to disclose related to the work in this manuscript. MWW 
reports personal fees from Bioclinica, personal fees from Cerecin/Accera, 
personal fees from Genentech, grants and personal fees from NIH, personal fees 
from Indiana University, personal fees from CHU Toulouse, personal fees from St. 
George University, personal fees from Eli Lilly, personal fees from Roche, 
personal fees from Lynch Group GLC, personal fees from Dolby Family Ventures, 
personal fees from Nestec/Nestle, personal fees from Health & Wellness Partners 
for American Academy of Neurology Conference, personal fees from AC Immune, 
personal fees from Alzheimer's Association, personal fees from Merck, personal 
fees from Bionest Partners, personal fees from Alzheon, Inc., personal fees from 
University of Tokyo, personal fees from Australian Catholic University, personal 
fees from University of Melbourne, personal fees from National Cntr for 
Geriatrics & Gerontology (Japan), grants from Department of Defense (DOD), 
grants from Johnson & Johnson (J&J), grants from Connie & Kevin Shanahan, grants 
from General Electric Research Labs (GE), grants from PCORI, grants from 
California Dept. of Public Health, grants from VUmc Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, grants from University of Michigan, grants from Ray & Dagmar 
Dolby Fund, grants from Biogen, grants from Hillblom Foundation, grants from 
Stroke Foundation, grants from Siemens, grants from Veterans Administration. All 
relationships stated above are outside the submitted work.


246. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2020 Dec 4;6(1):e12117. doi: 10.1002/trc2.12117. 
eCollection 2020.

APOE ε4/ε4 homozygotes with early Alzheimer's disease show accelerated 
hippocampal atrophy and cortical thinning that correlates with cognitive 
decline.

Abushakra S(1), Porsteinsson AP(2), Sabbagh M(3), Bracoud L(4), Schaerer J(4), 
Power A(1), Hey JA(1), Scott D(5), Suhy J(4)(5), Tolar M(1); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Alzheon Inc. Framingham Massachusetts USA.
(2)Alzheimer's Disease Care Research and Education Program University of 
Rochester Rochester New York USA.
(3)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health & University of Nevada Las 
Vegas Nevada USA.
(4)Bioclinica Lyon France.
(5)Bioclinica Newark California USA.

INTRODUCTION: Hippocampal volume (HV) and cortical thickness are commonly used 
imaging biomarkers in Alzheimer's disease (AD) trials, and may have utility as 
selection criteria for enrichment strategies. Atrophy rates of these measures, 
in the high-risk apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4/ε4 homozygous AD subjects are 
unknown.
METHODS: Data from Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI-1) and a 
tramiprosate trial were analyzed in APOE ε4/ε4 and APOE ε3/ε3 subjects with mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) or mild AD. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data 
were centrally processed using FreeSurfer; total HV and composite average 
cortical thickness were derived and adjusted for age, head size, and education. 
Volumetric changes from baseline were assessed using Boundary Shift Integral, 
and correlated with cognitive changes.
RESULTS: APOE ε4/ε4 MCI subjects showed significantly higher % HV atrophy and 
cortical thinning at 12 months (4.4%, 3.1%, n = 29) compared to APOE ε3/ε3 
subjects (2.8%, 1.8%, n = 93) and similarly in mild AD (7.4%, 4.7% n = 21 vs 
5.4%, 3.3% n = 29). Differences were all significant at 24 months. Over 24 
months, HV atrophy and cortical thinning correlated significantly with 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive subscale worsening in APOE ε4/ε4 
MCI subjects, but not in mild AD.
DISCUSSION: Correlation of volumetric measures to cognitive change in APOE ε4/ε4 
subjects with early AD supports their role as efficacy biomarkers. If confirmed 
in a Phase 3 trial with ALZ-801 (pro-drug of tramiprosate) in APOE ε4/ε4 early 
AD subjects, it may allow their use as surrogate outcomes in future treatment or 
prevention trials in AD.

© 2020 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical 
Interventions published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of Alzheimer's 
Association.

DOI: 10.1002/trc2.12117
PMCID: PMC7716452
PMID: 33304988

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Susan Abushakra serves as the chief medical 
officer of Alzheon, Inc. and holds stock and stock options of Alzheon, Inc. Dr. 
Martin Tolar serves as the founder, president, and chief executive officer of 
Alzheon, Inc. and holds stock and stock options of Alzheon, Inc. Dr. John A. Hey 
serves as the chief scientific officer of Alzheon, Inc. and holds stock and 
stock options of Alzheon, Inc. Dr. Aidan Power serves as a vice president at 
Alzheon, Inc. and holds stock and stock options of Alzheon, Inc. Dr. Anton 
Porsteinsson receives research support from the National Institutes of Health 
and U.S. Department of Defense. He also receives grants from AstraZeneca, 
Avanir, Biogen, Biohaven, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Genentech/Roche, Janssen, Novartis, 
Merck, and Toyama. He receives personal fees from Acadia Pharmaceuticals, 
Avanir, BioXcel, Eisai, Functional Neuromodulation, Grifols, Lundbeck, Merck, 
Neurim Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer, Tetra Discovery Partners, and Toyama. Dr. Marwan 
Sabbagh receives research support from the NIH and the Keep Memory Alive 
Foundation. He has consulting agreements with Allergan, Biogen, Bracket, 
Cortexyme, Grifols, Sanofi, Neurotrope, and Roche‐Genentech. He has ownership 
interest in Brain Health Inc., Versanum Inc., Neurotrope Inc., and uMethod 
Health. Drs. Joyce Suhy, Luc Bracoud, Joel Schaerer, and David Scott serve as 
full‐time employees of Bioclinica Inc. and have no competing interest in Alzheon 
Inc.


247. Neuroimage. 2012 Nov 15;63(3):1478-86. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.07.059. 
Epub 2012 Aug 3.

A computational neurodegenerative disease progression score: method and results 
with the Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative cohort.

Jedynak BM(1), Lang A, Liu B, Katz E, Zhang Y, Wyman BT, Raunig D, Jedynak CP, 
Caffo B, Prince JL; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Math and Statistics, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA. bruno.jedynak@jhu.edu

While neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by steady degeneration over 
relatively long timelines, it is widely believed that the early stages are the 
most promising for therapeutic intervention, before irreversible neuronal loss 
occurs. Developing a therapeutic response requires a precise measure of disease 
progression. However, since the early stages are for the most part asymptomatic, 
obtaining accurate measures of disease progression is difficult. Longitudinal 
databases of hundreds of subjects observed during several years with tens of 
validated biomarkers are becoming available, allowing the use of computational 
methods. We propose a widely applicable statistical methodology for creating a 
disease progression score (DPS), using multiple biomarkers, for subjects with a 
neurodegenerative disease. The proposed methodology was evaluated for 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) using the publicly available AD Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) database, yielding an Alzheimer's DPS or ADPS score for each subject and 
each time-point in the database. In addition, a common description of biomarker 
changes was produced allowing for an ordering of the biomarkers. The Rey 
Auditory Verbal Learning Test delayed recall was found to be the earliest 
biomarker to become abnormal. The group of biomarkers comprising the volume of 
the hippocampus and the protein concentration amyloid beta and Tau were next in 
the timeline, and these were followed by three cognitive biomarkers. The 
proposed methodology thus has potential to stage individuals according to their 
state of disease progression relative to a population and to deduce common 
behaviors of biomarkers in the disease itself.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.07.059
PMCID: PMC3472161
PMID: 22885136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2019 Jan 31;11(1):14. doi: 10.1186/s13195-019-0471-6.

Inferior and medial temporal tau and cortical amyloid are associated with daily 
functional impairment in Alzheimer's disease.

Halawa OA(1), Gatchel JR(1)(2)(3), Amariglio RE(1)(4)(5)(6)(7), Rentz 
DM(1)(4)(5)(6)(7), Sperling RA(1)(4)(5)(6), Johnson KA(1)(8)(5)(6), Marshall 
GA(9)(10)(11)(12); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 02114, 
USA.
(3)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA, 02478, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 02114, 
USA.
(5)Center for Alzheimer Research and Treatment, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 60 
Fenwood Road, 9016P, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115, 
USA.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115, 
USA.
(8)Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 02114, 
USA.
(9)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. gamarshall@partners.org.
(10)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 02114, 
USA. gamarshall@partners.org.
(11)Center for Alzheimer Research and Treatment, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
60 Fenwood Road, 9016P, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. gamarshall@partners.org.
(12)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115, 
USA. gamarshall@partners.org.

BACKGROUND: A decline in instrumental activities of daily living (IADL) 
correlates with the progression from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia and has been associated with frontal and 
parietal hypometabolism, lower cerebrospinal fluid amyloid β1-42, and inferior 
temporal cortical thinning. Identifying the underlying biomarkers of functional 
decline will allow for the early identification of individuals at risk of 
disease progression.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between IADL impairment and in vivo 
regional cerebral tau and cortical amyloid deposition across clinically normal 
(CN) elderly, MCI, and AD dementia.
METHODS: Fifty-one CN elderly, 30 MCI, and 9 AD dementia participants of the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) underwent assessment of 
regional tau deposition with flortaucipir (FTP) positron emission tomography 
(PET). An aggregate of cortical amyloid burden was assessed by florbetapir PET. 
IADL were assessed using the Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ). Tau 
regions with unadjusted correlations of p ≤ 0.006 (Bonferroni correction) with 
FAQ were used to evaluate the cross-sectional association between FAQ (dependent 
variable) and regional cerebral tau deposition, amyloid burden, and tau-amyloid 
interaction in separate general linear regression models with backward 
elimination. Covariates included age, American National Adult Reading Test 
(AMNART) intelligence quotient (IQ), and Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test 
(RAVLT) total learning.
RESULTS: Unadjusted correlations between FAQ and tau in the entorhinal cortex 
(EC) and inferior temporal cortex (IT) survived Bonferroni correction. FAQ was 
associated with the tau-amyloid interaction, such that in participants with 
greater amyloid burden, greater IADL impairment was associated with greater 
regional tau (EC tau × amyloid: partial r (pr) = 0.47, p < 0.001; IT tau × 
amyloid: pr = 0.54, p < 0.001). Significant associations were found when these 
regression models were repeated in symptomatic participants alone but not among 
CN participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Greater medial and inferior temporal tau and cortical amyloid 
burden were associated with greater IADL impairment in AD. Further elucidation 
of the biomarkers underlying the functional decline will allow for the early 
identification of individual at risk of disease progression.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-019-0471-6
PMCID: PMC6357436
PMID: 30704519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
Partners Healthcare Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved the study, as did 
the IRB of each Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) site. Written 
informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to initiation of any 
study procedures in accordance with IRB guidelines. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors have received research salary 
support from Eisai Inc. (GAM), Eli Lilly and Company (GAM, KAJ, RAS), Janssen 
Alzheimer Immunotherapy (DMR, GAM, KAJ, RAS), Avid Radiopharmaceuticals (KAJ, 
RAS), Navidea (KAJ), and Pfizer (KAJ). Additionally, DMR has served as a 
consultant for Eli Lilly, Neurotrack, Biogen, and Lundbeck Pharmaceuticals; GAM 
has served as a consultant for Grifols Shared Services North America, Inc. and 
Pifzer; KAJ has served as a consultant for Bayer, GE Healthcare, Janssen 
Alzheimer’s Immunotherapy, Siemens Medical Solutions, Genzyme, Novartis, Biogen, 
Roche, ISIS Pharma, AZTherapy, GEHC, Lundberg, and Abbvie; and RAS has served as 
a consultant for AbbVie, Biogen, Bracket, Genentech, Lundbeck, Roche, and 
Sanofi. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


249. Neuroimage. 2012 Jan 16;59(2):895-907. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.069. 
Epub 2011 Oct 4.

Multi-modal multi-task learning for joint prediction of multiple regression and 
classification variables in Alzheimer's disease.

Zhang D(1), Shen D; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and BRIC, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, NC 27599, USA. dqzhang@nuaa.edu.cn

Erratum in
    Neuroimage. 2012 Sep;62(3):2179.

Many machine learning and pattern classification methods have been applied to 
the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and its prodromal stage, i.e., mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI). Recently, rather than predicting categorical 
variables as in classification, several pattern regression methods have also 
been used to estimate continuous clinical variables from brain images. However, 
most existing regression methods focus on estimating multiple clinical variables 
separately and thus cannot utilize the intrinsic useful correlation information 
among different clinical variables. On the other hand, in those regression 
methods, only a single modality of data (usually only the structural MRI) is 
often used, without considering the complementary information that can be 
provided by different modalities. In this paper, we propose a general 
methodology, namely multi-modal multi-task (M3T) learning, to jointly predict 
multiple variables from multi-modal data. Here, the variables include not only 
the clinical variables used for regression but also the categorical variable 
used for classification, with different tasks corresponding to prediction of 
different variables. Specifically, our method contains two key components, i.e., 
(1) a multi-task feature selection which selects the common subset of relevant 
features for multiple variables from each modality, and (2) a multi-modal 
support vector machine which fuses the above-selected features from all 
modalities to predict multiple (regression and classification) variables. To 
validate our method, we perform two sets of experiments on ADNI baseline MRI, 
FDG-PET, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) data from 45 AD patients, 91 MCI 
patients, and 50 healthy controls (HC). In the first set of experiments, we 
estimate two clinical variables such as Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) and 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog), as well as 
one categorical variable (with value of 'AD', 'MCI' or 'HC'), from the baseline 
MRI, FDG-PET, and CSF data. In the second set of experiments, we predict the 
2-year changes of MMSE and ADAS-Cog scores and also the conversion of MCI to AD 
from the baseline MRI, FDG-PET, and CSF data. The results on both sets of 
experiments demonstrate that our proposed M3T learning scheme can achieve better 
performance on both regression and classification tasks than the conventional 
learning methods.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.069
PMCID: PMC3230721
PMID: 21992749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2017 Sep 12;9(1):72. doi: 10.1186/s13195-017-0300-8.

Moderating effects of sex on the impact of diagnosis and amyloid positivity on 
verbal memory and hippocampal volume.

Caldwell JZK(1), Berg JL(2), Cummings JL(2), Banks SJ(2); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, 888 West Bonneville 
Avenue, Las Vegas, NV, 89106, USA. caldwej5@ccf.org.
(2)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, 888 West Bonneville 
Avenue, Las Vegas, NV, 89106, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) impacts men and women differently, but the 
effect of sex on predementia stages is unclear. The objective of this study was 
to examine whether sex moderates the impact of florbetapir positron emission 
tomography (PET) amyloid positivity (A+) on verbal learning and memory 
performance and hippocampal volume (HV) in normal cognition (NC) and early mild 
cognitive impairment (eMCI).
METHODS: Seven hundred forty-two participants with NC and participants with eMCI 
from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (second cohort [ADNI2] and 
Grand Opportunity Cohort [ADNI-GO]) were included. All had baseline florbetapir 
PET measured, and 526 had screening visit HV measured. Regression moderation 
models were used to examine whether A+ effects on Rey Auditory Verbal Learning 
Test learning and delayed recall and right and left HV (adjusted for total 
intracranial volume) were moderated by diagnosis and sex. Age, cognition at 
screening, education, and apolipoprotein E ε4 carrier status were controlled.
RESULTS: Women with A+, but not those with florbetapir PET amyloid negative 
(A-),eMCI showed poorer learning. For women with NC, there was no relationship 
of A+ with learning. In contrast, A+ men trended toward poorer learning 
regardless of diagnosis. A similar trend was found for verbal delayed recall: 
Women with A+, but not A-, eMCI trended toward reduced delayed recall; no 
effects were observed for women with NC or for men. Hippocampal analyses 
indicated that women with A+, but not those with A-, eMCI, trended toward 
smaller right HV; no significant A+ effects were observed for women with NC. Men 
showed similar, though nonsignificant, patterns of smaller right HV in A+ eMCI, 
but not in men with A- eMCI or NC. No interactive effects of sex were noted for 
left HV.
CONCLUSIONS: Women with NC showed verbal learning and memory scores robust to 
A+, and women with A+ eMCI lost this advantage. In contrast, A+ impacted men's 
scores less significantly or not at all, and comparably across those with NC and 
eMCI. Sex marginally moderated the relationship of A+ and diagnosis with right 
HV, such that women with NC showed no A+ effect and women with A+ eMCI lost that 
advantage in neural integrity; the pattern in men was less clear. These findings 
show that women with A+ eMCI (i.e., prodromal AD) have differential neural and 
cognitive decline, which has implications for considering sex in early detection 
of AD and development of therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-017-0300-8
PMCID: PMC5596932
PMID: 28899422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: All 
data included in this article were collected for research use as part of the 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) project. ADNI is a 
longitudinal, multisite AD biomarker study (www.adni-info.org) that offers 
de-identified data meeting criteria for limited datasets to qualified 
researchers with scientific or educational institution affiliations, upon 
review. Ethics approval for data collection in ADNI was obtained by each ADNI 
participating institution’s institutional review board. All participants gave 
written informed consent at participating institutions. The authors of this 
paper were granted approved access to the ADNI data, and the ADNI Data Sharing 
and Publications Committee (DPC) approved this paper for submission to 
Alzheimer’s Research and Therapy (date of approval, February 24, 2017). CONSENT 
FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: JZKC, JLB, and SJB declare 
that they have no competing interests. JLC declares having received in kind 
research support from Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, Teva Pharmaceuticals, and 
CogState; having done consultation for AbbVie, ACADIA Pharmaceuticals, Accera, 
Actinogen Medical, Adamas Pharmaceuticals, Alkahest, Alzheon, Anavex Life 
Sciences, Astellas Pharma, AstraZeneca, Avanir Pharmaceuticals, Axovant 
Sciences, Biogen Idec, Biotie Therapies, Boehinger Ingelheim, Chase 
Pharmaceuticals, Eisai, FORUM Pharmaceuticals, Genentech, Grifols, 
Intra-Cellular Therapies, Iris Pharma, Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Eli Lilly and 
Company, Lundbeck, Merck, Neurotrope BioScience, Novartis, Nutricia, Otsuka, 
Pfizer, Probiodrug, QR Pharma, Resverlogix, Roche, Servier, Sunovion 
Pharmaceuticals, Suven Life Sciences, Takeda, Taisho Toyama Pharmaceutical Co., 
Transition Therapeutics, United Neuroscience, GE Healthcare, and MedAvante; 
owning stock in Adamas Pharmaceuticals, Prana Biotechnology, Sonexa 
Therapeutics, MedAvante, NeuroTrax, and Neurokos; and owning the copyright of 
the Neuropsychiatric Inventory. In addition, JLC has provided expert 
witness/legal consultation regarding olanzapine and ropinerole. PUBLISHER’S 
NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.


251. J Neurol Sci. 2025 Jan 15;468:123361. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2024.123361. Epub 2024 
Dec 19.

Explainable machine learning on clinical features to predict and differentiate 
Alzheimer's progression by sex: Toward a clinician-tailored web interface.

D'Amore FM(1), Moscatelli M(2), Malvaso A(3), D'Antonio F(4), Rodini M(5), 
Panigutti M(4), Mirino P(6), Carlesimo GA(7), Guariglia C(4), Caligiore D(8).

Author information:
(1)Computational and Translational Neuroscience Laboratory, Institute of 
Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, National Research Council 
(CTNLab-ISTC-CNR), Via Gian Domenico Romagnosi 18A, Rome 00196, Italy.
(2)Research Area Milano 4, National Research Council (CNR - AdRMi4), Via 
Fratelli Cervi 93, Segrate (MI) 20054, Italy.
(3)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, 
National Neurological Institute, University of Pavia, Via Mondino 2, Pavia 
27100, Italy.
(4)IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Via Del Fosso di Fiorano, 64, Rome 00143, 
Italy; Department of Psychology, Sapienza University, Piazzale Aldo Moro, 5, 
Rome 00185, Italy.
(5)IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Via Del Fosso di Fiorano, 64, Rome 00143, 
Italy.
(6)Computational and Translational Neuroscience Laboratory, Institute of 
Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, National Research Council 
(CTNLab-ISTC-CNR), Via Gian Domenico Romagnosi 18A, Rome 00196, Italy; AI2Life 
s.r.l., Innovative Start-Up, ISTC-CNR Spin-Off, Via Sebino 32, Rome 00199, 
Italy.
(7)IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Via Del Fosso di Fiorano, 64, Rome 00143, 
Italy; Department of System Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via 
Montpellier 1, Rome 00133, Italy.
(8)Computational and Translational Neuroscience Laboratory, Institute of 
Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, National Research Council 
(CTNLab-ISTC-CNR), Via Gian Domenico Romagnosi 18A, Rome 00196, Italy; AI2Life 
s.r.l., Innovative Start-Up, ISTC-CNR Spin-Off, Via Sebino 32, Rome 00199, 
Italy. Electronic address: daniele.caligiore@istc.cnr.it.

Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common neurodegenerative disorder world-wide, 
presents sex-specific differences in its manifestation and progression, 
necessitating personalized diagnostic approaches. Current procedures are often 
costly and invasive, lacking consideration of sex-based differences. This study 
introduces an explainable machine learning (ML) system to predict and 
differentiate the progression of AD based on sex, using non-invasive, easily 
collectible predictors such as neuropsychological test scores and 
sociodemographic data, enabling its application in every day clinical settings. 
The ML model uses SHapley Additive explanations (SHAP) and Local Interpretable 
Model-Agnostic Explanations (LIME) to provide clear insights into its 
decision-making, making complex outcomes easier to interpret. The system 
includes a user-friendly graphical interface designed in collaboration with 
clinicians, supporting its integration into medical practice. The study extends 
the cohort to include healthy and Mild Cognitive Impairment subjects, aiming to 
support early diagnosis in AD pre-clinical stages. The ML system was trained on 
a large dataset of 2407 subjects from the ADNI open dataset, enhancing its 
robustness and applicability. By focusing on sex-specific features and utilizing 
longitudinal data, the system aims to improve prediction accuracy and early 
detection of AD, ultimately advancing personalized diagnostic and therapeutic 
approaches. Key findings highlight the significance of the Mini-Mental State 
Examination, Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test, Logical Memory - Delayed Recall, 
and educational attainment in AD diagnosis and progression, with sex-based 
disparities. Despite performance metrics based on precision, recall, and 
weighted F1-score demonstrating model efficacy, future research should address 
the limitations of relying on a single dataset.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2024.123361
PMID: 39724825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest On behalf of 
all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of 
interest.


252. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Dec;20(12):8625-8638. doi: 10.1002/alz.14305. Epub 2024 
Oct 17.

Individualized, cross-validated prediction of future dementia using cognitive 
assessments in people with mild cognitive symptoms.

Borland E(1)(2), Mattson-Carlgren N(1)(2)(3), Tideman P(1)(4); Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; Stomrud E(1)(4), Hansson O(1)(4), Palmqvist 
S(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Malmö, 
Faculty of Medicine at Lund University, Clinical Research Centre, Malmö, Sweden.
(2)Department of Neurology, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
(3)Wallenberg Center for Molecular Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(4)Memory Clinic, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.

INTRODUCTION: We aimed to develop an algorithm to predict the individualized 
risk of future dementia using brief cognitive tests suitable for primary care.
METHODS: We included 612 participants with subjective cognitive decline (SCD) or 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) study, assessed for at least 4 years or until progression to 
dementia. A logistic regression model, using cognitive tests as predictors and 
dementia progression as an outcome, stratified participants into low, 
intermediate, or high risk. A second model, including 1-year cognitive test 
changes, was applied to the intermediate group. The models were replicated in 
392 SCD/MCI participants from the BioFINDER-1 study.
RESULTS: The best two-step model for predicting dementia incorporated Trail 
Making Test B (attention/executive function), Animal Fluency (verbal fluency), 
Mini-Mental State Examination (global cognition), and 10-word list recall 
(memory). The model's positive predictive value in ADNI was 85.8% and negative 
predictive value was 92.2% versus 62.5% and 95.6%, respectively, in BioFINDER-1.
DISCUSSION: This two-step model accurately predicts individualized dementia 
risk.
HIGHLIGHTS: To our knowledge, this is the first algorithm for predicting 
all-cause dementia using a novel two-step model utilizing brief cognitive tests. 
Applying a validated model including the Trail Making Test B, Animal Fluency, 
MMSE, Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale delayed, and immediate recall can 
robustly and accurately categorize individuals into low, intermediate, or high 
risk of dementia progression and can facilitate clinical decision-making and 
personalized patient care. We created an app that is available for research and 
educational purposes at https://brainapps.shinyapps.io/PredictAllCauseDementia 
to provide an individualized risk score for dementia progression.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14305
PMCID: PMC11667515
PMID: 39417379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Emma Borland, Erik Stomrud, and Pontus Tideman 
have no conflicts of interest to disclose. Niklas Mattson‐Carlgren has a 
consulting agreement with Biogen. Oskar Hansson has acquired research support 
(for the institution) from ADx, AVID Radiopharmaceuticals, Biogen, Eli Lilly, 
Eisai, Fujirebio, GE Healthcare, Pfizer, and Roche. In the past 2 years, he has 
received consultancy/speaker fees from AC Immune, Alzpath, BioArctic, Biogen, 
Bristol Meyer Squibb, Cerveau, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Fujirebio, Merck, Novartis, 
Novo Nordisk, Roche, Sanofi, and Siemens. Sebastian Palmqvist receives research 
support (for the institution) from Avid and ki elements/ADDF. In the past 2 
years, he has received consultancy/speaker fees from Bioartic, Biogen, Eisai, 
Eli Lilly, and Roche. Author disclosures are available in the Supporting 
information.


253. Neuroimage. 2013 Sep;78:233-48. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.03.073. Epub 2013 
Apr 12.

Modeling disease progression via multi-task learning.

Zhou J(1), Liu J, Narayan VA, Ye J; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Center for Evolutionary Medicine and Informatics, The Biodesign Institute, 
ASU, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common type of dementia, is a severe 
neurodegenerative disorder. Identifying biomarkers that can track the progress 
of the disease has recently received increasing attentions in AD research. An 
accurate prediction of disease progression would facilitate optimal 
decision-making for clinicians and patients. A definitive diagnosis of AD 
requires autopsy confirmation, thus many clinical/cognitive measures including 
Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale 
cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog) have been designed to evaluate the cognitive 
status of the patients and used as important criteria for clinical diagnosis of 
probable AD. In this paper, we consider the problem of predicting disease 
progression measured by the cognitive scores and selecting biomarkers predictive 
of the progression. Specifically, we formulate the prediction problem as a 
multi-task regression problem by considering the prediction at each time point 
as a task and propose two novel multi-task learning formulations. We have 
performed extensive experiments using data from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Specifically, we use the baseline MRI features 
to predict MMSE/ADAS-Cog scores in the next 4 years. Results demonstrate the 
effectiveness of the proposed multi-task learning formulations for disease 
progression in comparison with single-task learning algorithms including ridge 
regression and Lasso. We also perform longitudinal stability selection to 
identify and analyze the temporal patterns of biomarkers in disease progression. 
We observe that cortical thickness average of left middle temporal, cortical 
thickness average of left and right Entorhinal, and white matter volume of left 
Hippocampus play significant roles in predicting ADAS-Cog at all time points. We 
also observe that several MRI biomarkers provide significant information for 
predicting MMSE scores for the first 2 years, however very few are shown to be 
significant in predicting MMSE score at later stages. The lack of predictable 
MRI biomarkers in later stages may contribute to the lower prediction 
performance of MMSE than that of ADAS-Cog in our study and other related 
studies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.03.073
PMID: 23583359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Neuroimage Clin. 2023;39:103458. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2023.103458. Epub 2023 Jun 
26.

Preliminary validation of a structural magnetic resonance imaging metric for 
tracking dementia-related neurodegeneration and future decline.

Kress GT(1), Popa ES(2), Thompson PM(3), Bookheimer SY(4), Thomopoulos SI(3), 
Ching CRK(3), Zheng H(3), Hirsh DA(5), Merrill DA(6), Panos SE(2), Raji CA(7), 
Siddarth P(8), Bramen JE(9).

Author information:
(1)Pacific Brain Health Center, Pacific Neuroscience Institute Foundation, Santa 
Monica, CA 90404, USA; Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.
(2)Pacific Brain Health Center, Pacific Neuroscience Institute Foundation, Santa 
Monica, CA 90404, USA.
(3)Imaging Genetics Center, Mark and Mary Stevens Neuroimaging & Informatics 
Institute, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Marina 
del Rey, CA 90292, USA.
(4)Pacific Brain Health Center, Pacific Neuroscience Institute Foundation, Santa 
Monica, CA 90404, USA; David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Westwood, CA 90095, USA.
(5)Pacific Brain Health Center, Pacific Neuroscience Institute Foundation, Santa 
Monica, CA 90404, USA. Electronic address: daniel@hirschtechsolutions.com.
(6)Pacific Brain Health Center, Pacific Neuroscience Institute Foundation, Santa 
Monica, CA 90404, USA; Department of Translational Neurosciences and 
Neurotherapeutics, Providence Saint John's Cancer Institute, Santa Monica, CA 
90404, USA; UCLA Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, David 
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Westwood, CA 
90095, USA.
(7)Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, 
USA.
(8)Pacific Brain Health Center, Pacific Neuroscience Institute Foundation, Santa 
Monica, CA 90404, USA; UCLA Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, 
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, 
Westwood, CA 90095, USA.
(9)Pacific Brain Health Center, Pacific Neuroscience Institute Foundation, Santa 
Monica, CA 90404, USA. Electronic address: jbramen@pacificneuro.org.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease 
characterized by cognitive decline and atrophy in the medial temporal lobe (MTL) 
and subsequent brain regions. Structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) has 
been widely used in research and clinical care for diagnosis and monitoring AD 
progression. However, atrophy patterns are complex and vary by patient. To 
address this issue, researchers have made efforts to develop more concise 
metrics that can summarize AD-specific atrophy. Many of these methods can be 
difficult to interpret clinically, hampering adoption. In this study, we 
introduce a novel index which we call an "AD-NeuroScore," that uses a modified 
Euclidean-inspired distance function to calculate differences between regional 
brain volumes associated with cognitive decline. The index is adjusted for 
intracranial volume (ICV), age, sex, and scanner model. We validated 
AD-NeuroScore using 929 older adults from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) study, with a mean age of 72.7 years (SD = 6.3; 55.1-91.5) and 
cognitively normal (CN), mild cognitive impairment (MCI), or AD diagnoses. Our 
validation results showed that AD-NeuroScore was significantly associated with 
diagnosis and disease severity scores (measured by MMSE, CDR-SB, and ADAS-11) at 
baseline. Furthermore, baseline AD-NeuroScore was associated with both changes 
in diagnosis and disease severity scores at all time points with available data. 
The performance of AD-NeuroScore was equivalent or superior to adjusted 
hippocampal volume (AHV), a widely used metric in AD research. Further, 
AD-NeuroScore typically performed as well as or sometimes better when compared 
to other existing sMRI-based metrics. In conclusion, we have introduced a new 
metric, AD-NeuroScore, which shows promising results in detecting AD, 
benchmarking disease severity, and predicting disease progression. AD-NeuroScore 
differentiates itself from other metrics by being clinically practical and 
interpretable.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2023.103458
PMCID: PMC10338152
PMID: 37421927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: The Pacific Neuroscience Institute 
Foundation (PNIF) is a public charity that holds a patent for AD-NeuroScore. JB, 
EP, DM, and SP, are employees of PNIF. GK, SB, and PS served as 
consultants/advisors for PNIF. PT received partial grant support from Biogen, 
Inc., for research unrelated to this manuscript. ST, CC, and HZ have nothing to 
disclose.


255. Transl Psychiatry. 2021 Nov 10;11(1):577. doi: 10.1038/s41398-021-01675-2.

Mild behavioral impairment correlates of cognitive impairments in older adults 
without dementia: mediation by amyloid pathology.

Sun Y(1), Xu W(1), Chen KL(2), Shen XN(2), Tan L(3), Yu JT(4); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(2)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, State 
Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and MOE Frontiers Center for Brain 
Science, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China. dr.tanlan@163.com.
(4)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, State 
Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and MOE Frontiers Center for Brain 
Science, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. 
jintai_yu@fudan.edu.cn.

The relationship between mild behavioral impairment (MBI) and Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) is intricate and still not well investigated. The purpose of the 
study is to examine the roles of the AD imaging pathologies in modulating the 
associations of MBI with cognitive impairments. We analyzed 1129 participants 
(563 [49.86%] female), who had measures of Neuropsychiatric Inventory 
Questionnaire (NPI-Q), cognition, and amyloid PET AD biomarkers from the 
Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). We assess the longitudinal 
neuropathological and clinical correlates of baseline MBI via linear mixed 
effects and Cox proportional hazard models. The mediation analyses were used to 
test the mediation effects of AD pathologies on cognition. We found that MBI was 
associated with worse global cognition as represented by Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) (p < 0.001), and higher β-amyloid burden (p < 0.001). 
β-amyloid partially mediated the effects of MBI on cognition with the mediation 
percentage varied from 14.67 to 40.86% for general cognition, memory, executive, 
and language functions for non-dementia individuals. However, no significant 
associations were discovered between MBI and tau burden or neurodegeneration. 
Furthermore, longitudinal analyses revealed that individuals with MBI had a 
faster increase in brain amyloid burden (p < 0.001) and a higher risk of 
clinical conversion (HR = 2.42, 95% CI = 1.45 to 4.01 p < 0.001). In conclusion, 
MBI could be an imperative prediction indicator of clinical and pathological 
progression. In addition, amyloid pathologies might partially mediate the 
influences of MBI on cognitive impairments and AD risk.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-021-01675-2
PMCID: PMC8580970
PMID: 34759274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


256. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;46(4):901-12. doi: 10.3233/JAD-142943.

Neuropsychological Testing Predicts Cerebrospinal Fluid Amyloid-β in Mild 
Cognitive Impairment.

Kandel BM(1), Avants BB(2), Gee JC(2), Arnold SE(3), Wolk DA(4); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative1.

Author information:
(1)Penn Image Computing and Science Laboratory and Department of Bioengineering, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Penn Image Computing and Science Laboratory and Department of Radiology, 
Perelman School of Medicine of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine of the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine of the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Psychometric tests predict conversion of mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) to probable Alzheimer's disease (AD). Because the definition of clinical 
AD relies on those same psychometric tests, the ability of these tests to 
identify underlying AD pathology remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the degree to which psychometric testing predicts 
molecular evidence of AD amyloid pathology, as indicated by cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) amyloid-β (Aβ)1 - 42, in patients with MCI, as compared to neuroimaging 
biomarkers.
METHODS: We identified 408 MCI subjects with CSF Aβ levels, psychometric test 
data, FDG-PET scans, and acceptable volumetric MR scans from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). We used psychometric tests and imaging 
biomarkers in univariate and multivariate models to predict Aβ status.
RESULTS: The 30-min delayed recall score of the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning 
Test was the best predictor of Aβ status among the psychometric tests, achieving 
an AUC of 0.67 ± 0.02 and odds ratio of 2.5 ± 0.4. FDG-PET was the best 
imaging-based biomarker (AUC 0.67 ± 0.03, OR 3.2 ± 1.2), followed by hippocampal 
volume (AUC 0.64 ± 0.02, OR 2.4 ± 0.3). A multivariate analysis based on the 
psychometric tests improved on the univariate predictors, achieving an AUC of 
0.68 ± 0.03 (OR 3.38 ± 1.2). Adding imaging biomarkers to the multivariate 
analysis did not improve the AUC.
CONCLUSION: Psychometric tests perform as well as imaging biomarkers to predict 
presence of molecular markers of AD pathology in MCI patients and should be 
considered in the determination of the likelihood that MCI is due to AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-142943
PMCID: PMC4699841
PMID: 25881908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Pharmaceut Med. 2019 Dec;33(6):511-518. doi: 10.1007/s40290-019-00306-y.

Current Landscape of Late-Phase Clinical Trials for Alzheimer's Disease: 
Comparing Regional Variation Between Subjects in Japan and North America.

Kikuchi M(1)(2), Adachi N(3), Matsumaru N(4), Tsukamoto K(4).

Author information:
(1)Global Regulatory Science, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, Gifu, Japan. 
masashi.kikuchi@merck.com.
(2)Japan Development, MSD K.K., 1-13-12 Kudan-kita, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 102-8667, 
Japan. masashi.kikuchi@merck.com.
(3)Japan Development, MSD K.K., 1-13-12 Kudan-kita, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 102-8667, 
Japan.
(4)Global Regulatory Science, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, Gifu, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Over the last few decades, numerous late-phase multi-regional 
clinical trials have been conducted to develop a novel treatment for Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), with no effective results.
OBJECTIVE: To inform the design and interpretation of future clinical trials, 
the aim of this study was first to examine the current landscape of late-phase 
clinical trials to determine key study design characteristics, and then assess 
the regional variation between Japan and North America for the most utilized 
clinical efficacy endpoint in the most targeted stage of the disease.
METHODS: The study design and the mechanism of action of the interventional 
drugs tested in the late-phase clinical trials initiated in the last 5 years 
(2014-2018) were assessed based on the records in ClinicalTrials.gov database. 
The regional variation of the most utilized clinical efficacy endpoint in the 
most targeted population was assessed using data from two similarly designed 
observational studies conducted in Japan (Japanese Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative, J-ADNI) and North America (Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative, ADNI). For the most utilized clinical efficacy 
endpoint, the change from baseline (CFB) at Month 6, Year 1 and Year 2 was 
estimated using the growth curve model with a random intercept and slope, 
including gender as a fixed factor and age, apolipoprotein E ε4 genotype and 
years of education as covariates.
RESULTS: Of 48 Phase III trials that were initiated during the study period, 25 
were disease-modifying treatment trials in which individuals with early AD were 
the most studied (56%) and Clinical Dementia Rating-Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) was 
the most frequently utilized primary clinical efficacy endpoint (64%). The 
baseline characteristics of the early AD population between J-ADNI and ADNI were 
generally comparable, except for years of education. When comparing CDR-SB in 
early AD, J-ADNI had generally better baseline scores and the overall 
progression was similar (CFB at Year 2, ADNI 2.7 and J-ADNI 2.3, p = 0.190), 
despite slower progression in functional domains (CFB at Year 2, ADNI 1.4 and 
J-ADNI 1.0, p = 0.031).
CONCLUSION: Over the years, the target population has shifted toward early stage 
of the disease, wherein the clinical progression is slower and difficult to 
measure. Moreover, our results suggest that regional variation could have an 
impact on functional measurements due to cultural differences in pivotal 
clinical trials. Therefore, caution should be exercised according to the 
characteristics of the endpoint used.

DOI: 10.1007/s40290-019-00306-y
PMID: 31933241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


258. PLoS One. 2020 Feb 21;15(2):e0228064. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0228064. 
eCollection 2020.

Using practice effects for targeted trials or sub-group analysis in Alzheimer's 
disease: How practice effects predict change over time.

Wang G(1), Kennedy RE(2), Goldberg TE(3), Fowler ME(4), Cutter GR(5), Schneider 
LS(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biostatistics, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, 
Missouri, United States of America.
(2)Comprehensive Center of Aging Health, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, Alabama, United States of America.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York, New York, United 
States of America.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama, United States of America.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama, United States of America.
(6)Department of Psychiatry and The Behavioral Sciences, Keck School of 
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United 
States of America.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the presence of practice effects in persons with 
Alzheimer disease (AD) or mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and to evaluate how 
practice effects affect cognitive progression and the outcome of clinical 
trials.
METHODS: Using data from a meta-database consisting of 18 studies including 
participants from the Alzheimer disease Cooperative Study (ADCS) and the 
Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) with ADAS-Cog11 as the primary 
outcome, we defined practice effects based on the improvement in the first two 
ADAS-Cog11 scores and then estimated the presence of practice effects and 
compared the cognitive progression between participants with and without 
practice effects. The robustness of practice effects was investigated using CDR 
SB, an outcome independent the definition itself. Furthermore, we evaluated how 
practice effects can affect sample size estimation.
RESULTS: The overall percent of practice effects for AD participants was 39.0% 
and 53.3% for MCI participants. For AD studies, the mean change from baseline to 
2 years was 12.8 points for the non-practice effects group vs 7.4 for the 
practice effects group; whereas for MCI studies, it was 4.1 for non-practice 
effects group vs 0.2 for the practice effects group. AD participants without 
practice effects progressed 0.9 points faster than those with practice effects 
over a period of 2 years in CDR-SB; whereas for MCI participants, the difference 
is 0.7 points. The sample sizes can be different by over 35% when estimated 
based on participants with/without practice effects.
CONCLUSION: Practice effects were prevalent and robust in persons with AD or MCI 
and affected the cognitive progression and sample size estimation. Planning of 
future AD or MCI clinical trials should account for practice effects to avoid 
underpower or considers target trials or stratification analysis based on 
practice effects.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0228064
PMCID: PMC7034859
PMID: 32084191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


259. Front Hum Neurosci. 2017 Feb 6;11:33. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00033. eCollection 
2017.

Prediction of Mild Cognitive Impairment Conversion Using a Combination of 
Independent Component Analysis and the Cox Model.

Liu K(1), Chen K(2), Yao L(1), Guo X(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Information Science and Technology, Beijing Normal University 
Beijing, China.
(2)Banner Alzheimer's Institute and Banner Good Samaritan PET Center, Phoenix 
AZ, USA.

Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) represents a transitional stage from normal 
aging to Alzheimer's disease (AD) and corresponds to a higher risk of developing 
AD. Thus, it is necessary to explore and predict the onset of AD in MCI stage. 
In this study, we propose a combination of independent component analysis (ICA) 
and the multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression model to investigate 
promising risk factors associated with MCI conversion among 126 MCI converters 
and 108 MCI non-converters from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) database. Using structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and 
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) data, we extracted 
brain networks from AD and normal control groups via ICA and then constructed 
Cox models that included network-based neuroimaging factors for the MCI group. 
We carried out five separate Cox analyses and the two-modality neuroimaging Cox 
model identified three significant network-based risk factors with higher 
prediction performance (accuracy = 73.50%) than those in either single-modality 
model (accuracy = 68.80%). Additionally, the results of the comprehensive Cox 
model, including significant neuroimaging factors and clinical variables, 
demonstrated that MCI individuals with reduced gray matter volume in a temporal 
lobe-related network of structural MRI [hazard ratio (HR) = 8.29E-05 (95% 
confidence interval (CI), 5.10E- 07 ~ 0.013)], low glucose metabolism in the 
posterior default mode network based on FDG-PET [HR = 0.066 (95% CI, 4.63E-03 ~ 
0.928)], positive apolipoprotein E ε4-status [HR = 1. 988 (95% CI, 1.531 ~ 
2.581)], increased Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale 
scores [HR = 1.100 (95% CI, 1.059 ~ 1.144)] and Sum of Boxes of Clinical 
Dementia Rating scores [HR = 1.622 (95% CI, 1.364 ~ 1.930)] were more likely to 
convert to AD within 36 months after baselines. These significant risk factors 
in such comprehensive Cox model had the best prediction ability (accuracy = 
84.62%, sensitivity = 86.51%, specificity = 82.41%) compared to either 
neuroimaging factors or clinical variables alone. These results suggested that a 
combination of ICA and Cox model analyses could be used successfully in survival 
analysis and provide a network-based perspective of MCI progression or 
AD-related studies.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00033
PMCID: PMC5292818
PMID: 28220065


260. Sci Rep. 2018 May 10;8(1):7490. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-25377-w.

Sex Differences in Cognitive Decline in Subjects with High Likelihood of Mild 
Cognitive Impairment due to Alzheimer's disease.

Sohn D(1)(2), Shpanskaya K(3), Lucas JE(4), Petrella JR(5), Saykin AJ(6), Tanzi 
RE(7), Samatova NF(1)(2), Doraiswamy PM(8).

Author information:
(1)North Carolina State University, Department of Computer Science, Raleigh, NC, 
27695, USA.
(2)Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Computer Science and Mathematics Division, Oak 
Ridge, TN, 37831, USA.
(3)Stanford University School of Medicine, Department of Radiology, Stanford, 
CA, 94025, USA.
(4)Duke University, Department of Statistical Science, Durham, NC, 27708, USA.
(5)Duke University Medical Center, Department of Radiology, Durham, NC, 27710, 
USA.
(6)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indiana Alzheimer Disease Center and 
the Center for Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, 
Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA.
(7)Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Genetics and Aging 
Research Unit and Department of Neurology, Stanford, CA, 02129, USA.
(8)Duke University Health System, Neurocognitive Disorders Program, Department 
of Psychiatry and the Duke Institute for Brain Sciences, Durham, NC, 27710, USA. 
murali.doraiswamy@duke.edu.

Sex differences in Alzheimer's disease (AD) biology and progression are not yet 
fully characterized. The goal of this study is to examine the effect of sex on 
cognitive progression in subjects with high likelihood of mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) due to Alzheimer's and followed up to 10 years in the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Cerebrospinal fluid 
total-tau and amyloid-beta (Aβ42) ratio values were used to sub-classify 559 MCI 
subjects (216 females, 343 males) as having "high" or "low" likelihood for MCI 
due to Alzheimer's. Data were analyzed using mixed-effects models incorporating 
all follow-ups. The worsening from baseline in Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-Cognitive score (mean, SD) (9 ± 12) in subjects with high likelihood of 
MCI due to Alzheimer's was markedly greater than that in subjects with low 
likelihood (1 ± 6, p < 0.0001). Among MCI due to AD subjects, the mean worsening 
in cognitive score was significantly greater in females (11.58 ± 14) than in 
males (6.87 ± 11, p = 0.006). Our findings highlight the need to further 
investigate these findings in other populations and develop sex specific 
timelines for Alzheimer's disease progression.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-25377-w
PMCID: PMC5945611
PMID: 29748598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P.M.D., R.E.T., A.J.S. and J.R.P. have served as 
an advisor to and/or received grants from foundations and companies for other 
work in this field. P.M.D. owns stock in several companies whose products are 
not discussed here.


261. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2020 May;26(5):464-479. doi: 10.1017/S1355617719001346. 
Epub 2019 Dec 11.

Discrepancy-Based Evidence for Loss of Thinking Abilities (DELTA): Development 
and Validation of a Novel Approach to Identifying Cognitive Changes.

Asken BM(1)(2), Thomas KR(3)(4), Lee A(1)(5), Davis JD(1)(6), Malloy PF(1)(5), 
Salloway SP(1)(5), Correia S(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Alpert Medical School of Brown 
University, Providence, RI02906, USA.
(2)Department of Clinical and Health Psychology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL32610, USA.
(3)Research Service, Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, 
CA92161, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego School of 
Medicine, La Jolla, CA92093, USA.
(5)Butler Hospital, Memory and Aging Program, Providence, RI02906, USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI02905, USA.
(7)Mental Health and Behavioral Science Service, Providence VA Medical Center, 
Providence, RI02908, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To develop and validate the Discrepancy-based Evidence for Loss of 
Thinking Abilities (DELTA) score. The DELTA score characterizes the strength of 
evidence for cognitive decline on a continuous spectrum using well-established 
psychometric principles for improving detection of cognitive changes.
METHODS: DELTA score development used neuropsychological test scores from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort (two tests each from 
Memory, Executive Function, and Language domains). We derived regression-based 
normative reference scores using age, gender, years of education, and 
word-reading ability from robust cognitively normal ADNI participants. 
Discrepancies between predicted and observed scores were used for calculating 
the DELTA score (range 0-15). We validated DELTA scores primarily against 
longitudinal Clinical Dementia Rating-Sum of Boxes (CDR-SOB) and Functional 
Activities Questionnaire (FAQ) scores (baseline assessment through Year 3) using 
linear mixed models and secondarily against cross-sectional Alzheimer's 
biomarkers.
RESULTS: There were 1359 ADNI participants with calculable baseline DELTA scores 
(age 73.7 ± 7.1 years, 55.4% female, 100% white/Caucasian). Higher baseline 
DELTA scores (stronger evidence of cognitive decline) predicted higher baseline 
CDR-SOB (ΔR2 = .318) and faster rates of CDR-SOB increase over time (ΔR2 = 
.209). Longitudinal changes in DELTA scores tracked closely and in the same 
direction as CDR-SOB scores (fixed and random effects of mean + mean-centered 
DELTA, ΔR2 > .7). Results were similar for FAQ scores. High DELTA scores 
predicted higher PET-Aβ SUVr (ρ = 324), higher CSF-pTau/CSF-Aβ ratio (ρ = .460), 
and demonstrated PPV > .9 for positive Alzheimer's disease biomarker 
classification.
CONCLUSIONS: Data support initial development and validation of the DELTA score 
through its associations with longitudinal functional changes and Alzheimer's 
biomarkers. We provide several considerations for future research and include an 
automated scoring program for clinical use.

DOI: 10.1017/S1355617719001346
PMID: 31822312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Transl Neurodegener. 2018 Sep 10;7:23. doi: 10.1186/s40035-018-0127-7. 
eCollection 2018.

Cerebrospinal fluid phosphorylated tau, visinin-like protein-1, and 
chitinase-3-like protein 1 in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease.

Zhang H(1), Ng KP(2), Therriault J(3), Kang MS(3), Pascoal TA(3), Rosa-Neto 
P(3), Gauthier S(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, 400016 China.
(2)2Department of Neurology, National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(3)3The McGill University Research Centre for Studies in Aging, McGill 
University, Montreal, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Visinin-like protein-1 (VILIP-1) and chitinase-3-like protein 1 
(CHI3L1 or YKL-40) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) are newly discovered markers 
indicating neuronal damage and microglial activation, respectively. 
Phosphorylated tau (p-tau) reflects the neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) and is useful as diagnostic markers for AD. However, it is unknown whether 
these biomarkers have similar or complementary information in AD.
METHODS: We stratified 121 participants from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database into cognitively normal (CN), stable 
mild cognitive impairment (sMCI), progressive MCI (pMCI), and dementia due to 
AD. Analysis of covariance (ANOVA) and chi-square analyses, Spearman 
correlation, and logistic regression models were performed to test the 
demographic, associations between biomarkers, and diagnostic accuracies, 
respectively. Linear mixed-effects models were used to evaluate the effects of 
CSF amyloid-β (Aβ) on above biomarkers within diagnostic groups, the combination 
of diagnostic group and Aβ status as predictor, and CSF biomarkers as predictors 
of AD features, including cognition measured by Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE) and brain structure and white matter hyperintensity (WMH) measured by 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
RESULTS: P-tau, VILIP-1, and YKL-40 were all predictors of AD diagnosis, but 
combinations of biomarkers did not improve the diagnostic accuracy (AUC 0.924 
for p-tau, VILIP-1, and YKL-40) compared to p-tau (AUC 0.922). P-tau and VILIP-1 
were highly correlated (r = 0.639, p < 0.001) and strongly associated with Aβ 
pathology across clinical stages of AD, while YKL-40 was correlated with Aβ 
pathology in CN and AD groups. VILIP-1 was associated with acceleration of 
cognitive decline, hippocampal atrophy, and expansion of ventricles in 
longitudinal analyses. YKL-40 was associated with hippocampal atrophy at 
baseline and follow-up, while p-tau was only associated with worsening WMH at 
baseline.
CONCLUSIONS: CSF levels of p-tau, VILIP-1, and YKL-40 may have utility for 
discriminating between cognitively normal subjects and patients with AD. 
Increased levels of both VILIP-1 and YKL-40 may be associated with disease 
degeneration. These CSF biomarkers should be considered for future assessment in 
the characterization of the natural history of AD.

DOI: 10.1186/s40035-018-0127-7
PMCID: PMC6161434
PMID: 30311914

Conflict of interest statement: The ADNI study was approved by the Institutional 
Review boards of all of the participating institutions. All participants 
provided informed consent at each site.Not applicable.The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.


263. Front Neurol. 2019 May 15;10:486. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00486. eCollection 
2019.

Quantitative (18)F-AV1451 Brain Tau PET Imaging in Cognitively Normal Older 
Adults, Mild Cognitive Impairment, and Alzheimer's Disease Patients.

Zhao Q(1)(2), Liu M(2)(3), Ha L(2)(4), Zhou Y(2)(5); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Shaw 
LM, Khachaturian Z, Sorensen G, Carrillo M, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies 
P, Fillit H, Hefti F, Holtzman D, Mesulam MM, Potter W, Snyder P, Schwartz A, 
Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, 
Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, Balasubramanian AB, Mason J, Sim I, Beckett L, 
Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, 
DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Vemuri P, Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward 
C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Morris 
JC, Cairns NJ, Franklin E, Taylor-Reinwald L, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, 
Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin 
S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Thal L, Khachaturian Z, Thal L, 
Buckholtz N, Weiner MW, Snyder PJ, Potter W, Paul S, Albert M, Frank R, 
Khachaturian Z, Hsiao J, Kaye J, Quinn J, Silbert L, Lind B, Carter R, Dolen S, 
Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Becerra M, Teodoro L, Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag 
H, Fleisher A, Heidebrink JL, Lord JL, Petersen R, Mason SS, Albers CS, Knopman 
D, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Pavlik V, Shibley V, Chowdhury M, 
Rountree S, Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Ances B, Morris JC, Carroll M, 
Creech ML, Franklin E, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Oliver A, Marson D, Geldmacher D, 
Natelson Love M, Griffith R, Clark D, Brockington J, Roberson E, Grossman H, 
Mitsis E, Shah RC, deToledo-Morrell L, Duara R, Greig-Custo MT, Barker W, Albert 
M, Onyike C, D'Agostino D 2nd, Kielb S, Sadowski M, Sheikh MO, Anaztasia U, 
Mrunalini G, Doraiswamy PM, Petrella JR, Borges-Neto S, Wong TZ, Coleman E, 
Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk DA, Clark CM, Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, Sinha P, 
Oates E, Conrad G, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein 
BS, Martin K, Makino KM, Ismail MS, Brand C, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, 
Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Swerdlow 
RH, Brooks WM, Apostolova L, Tingus K, Woo E, Silverman DH, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, 
Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Poki-Walker K, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews BR, 
Brosch JR, Herring S, van Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Varma P, Chertkow H, 
Bergman H, Hosein C, Black S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GR, Mudge B, 
Sossi V, Feldman H, Assaly M, Finger E, Pasternack S, Rachisky I, Trost D, 
Kertesz A, Bernick C, Munic D, Mesulam MM, Rogalski E, Lipowski K, Weintraub S, 
Bonakdarpour B, Kerwin D, Wu CK, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, Villena T, Turner RS, 
Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall G, Yesavage J, Taylor 
JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh MN, Belden CM, Jacobson SA, Sirrel 
SA, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, Obisesan TO, Wolday 
S, Allard J, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Tatsuoka C, Fatica P, Fletcher E, Maillard P, 
Olichney J, DeCarli C, Carmichael O, Kittur S, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, 
Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, Tariot P, Burke 
A, Milliken AM, Trncic N, Fleisher A, Reeder S, Bates V, Capote H, Rainka M, 
Scharre DW, Kataki M, Kelley B, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, Brown AD, Pearlson GD, 
Blank K, Anderson K, Flashman LA, Seltzer M, Hynes ML, Santulli RB, Sink KM, 
Leslie G, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Tremont G, Daiello LA, 
Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Perry D, Mintzer J, Spicer 
K, Bachman D, Finger E, Pasternak S, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, Drost D, 
Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, Schultz SK, Smith KE, Koleva H, Nam KW, Shim H, 
Relkin N, Chiang G, Lin M, Ravdin L, Smith A, Raj BA, Fargher K, Weiner MW, 
Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Green RC, Harvey D, Jack CR Jr, Jagust 
W, Morris JC, Saykin AJ, Shaw LM, Toga AW, Trojanowki JQ, Neylan T, Grafman J, 
Green RC, Montine T, Weiner M, Petersen R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Devon 
G, Sather T, Melissa D, Morrison R, Jiminez G, Neylan T, Jacqueline H, Shannon 
F, Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, 
Kejal K, Chad W, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Landau S, 
Morris JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, 
Figurski M, Toga AW, Karen C, Scott N, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, 
Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Karl F, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Mauricio B, 
Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Fleischman D, Arfanakis K, 
Shah RC, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Doraiswamy PM, Petrella JR, James O, 
Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein B, Martin KS, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, Mintzer 
J, Massoglia D, Brawman-Mintzer O, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Jagust W, 
Landau S, Rosen H, Perry D, Turner RS, Behan K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson 
KA, Marshall G, Sabbagh MN, Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Obisesan TO, Wolday S, 
Allard J, Johnson SC, Fruehling JJ, Harding S, Peskind ER, Petrie EC, Li G, 
Yesavage JA, Taylor JL, Furst AJ, Chao S, Relkin N, Chiang G, Ravdin L, Ravdin 
L, Mackin S, Aisen P, Raman R, Mackin S, Weiner M, Aisen P, Raman R, Jack CR Jr, 
Landau S, Saykin AJ, Toga AW, DeCarli C, Koeppe RA, Green RC, Drake E, Weiner M, 
Aisen P, Raman R, Donohue M, Jimenez G, Gessert D, Harless K, Salazar J, Cabrera 
Y, Walter S, Hergesheimer L, Shaffer E, Mackin S, Nelson C, Bickford D, Butters 
M, Zmuda M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Kantarci K, 
Ward C, Reyes D, Koeppe RA, Landau S, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, 
Foroud TM, Faber KM, Nho K, Nudelman KN, Mackin S, Rosen H, Nelson C, Bickford 
D, Au YH, Scherer K, Catalinotto D, Stark S, Ong E, Fernandez D, Butters M, 
Zmuda M, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical 
University, Yinchuan, China.
(2)The Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(3)Department of Radiology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(4)Center for Reproductive Medicine, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical 
University, Yinchuan, China.
(5)Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University in St. Louis 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States.

Recent developments of tau Positron Emission Tomography (PET) allows assessment 
of regional neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) deposition in human brain. Among the 
tau PET molecular probes, 18F-AV1451 is characterized by high selectivity for 
pathologic tau aggregates over amyloid plaques, limited non-specific binding in 
white and gray matter, and confined off-target binding. The objectives of the 
study are (1) to quantitatively characterize regional brain tau deposition 
measured by 18F-AV1451 PET in cognitively normal older adults (CN), mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI), and AD participants; (2) to evaluate the 
correlations between cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers or Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) and 18F-AV1451 PET standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR); 
and (3) to evaluate the partial volume effects on 18F-AV1451 brain uptake. 
Methods: The study included total 115 participants (CN = 49, MCI = 58, and AD = 
8) from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Preprocessed 
18F-AV1451 PET images, structural MRIs, and demographic and clinical assessments 
were downloaded from the ADNI database. A reblurred Van Cittertiteration method 
was used for voxelwise partial volume correction (PVC) on PET images. Structural 
MRIs were used for PET spatial normalization and region of interest (ROI) 
definition in standard space. The parametric images of 18F-AV1451 SUVR relative 
to cerebellum were calculated. The ROI SUVR measurements from PVC and non-PVC 
SUVR images were compared. The correlation between ROI 18F-AV1451 SUVR and the 
measurements of MMSE, CSF total tau (t-tau), and phosphorylated tau (p-tau) were 
also assessed. Results: 18F-AV1451 prominently specific binding was found in the 
amygdala, entorhinal cortex, parahippocampus, fusiform, posterior cingulate, 
temporal, parietal, and frontal brain regions. Most regional SUVRs showed 
significantly higher uptake of 18F-AV1451 in AD than MCI and CN participants. 
SUVRs of small regions like amygdala, entorhinal cortex and parahippocampus were 
statistically improved by PVC in all groups (p < 0.01). Although there was an 
increasing tendency of 18F-AV-1451 SUVRs in MCI group compared with CN group, no 
significant difference of 18F-AV1451 deposition was found between CN and MCI 
brains with or without PVC (p > 0.05). Declined MMSE score was observed with 
increasing 18F-AV1451 binding in amygdala, entorhinal cortex, parahippocampus, 
and fusiform. CSF p-tau was positively correlated with 18F-AV1451 deposition. 
PVC improved the results of 18F-AV-1451 tau deposition and correlation studies 
in small brain regions. Conclusion: The typical deposition of 18F-AV1451 tau PET 
imaging in AD brain was found in amygdala, entorhinal cortex, fusiform and 
parahippocampus, and these regions were strongly associated with cognitive 
impairment and CSF biomarkers. Although more deposition was observed in MCI 
group, the 18F-AV-1451 PET imaging could not differentiate the MCI patients from 
CN population. More tau deposition related to decreased MMSE score and increased 
level of CSF p-tau, especially in ROIs of amygdala, entorhinal cortex and 
parahippocampus. PVC did improve the results of tau deposition and correlation 
studies in small brain regions and suggest to be routinely used in 18F-AV1451 
tau PET quantification.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00486
PMCID: PMC6530456
PMID: 31156534


264. Arch Neurol. 2012 May;69(5):614-22. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2011.3029.

Comparison of imaging biomarkers in the Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative and the Mayo Clinic Study of Aging.

Whitwell JL(1), Wiste HJ, Weigand SD, Rocca WA, Knopman DS, Roberts RO, Boeve 
BF, Petersen RC, Jack CR Jr; Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA. whitwell.jennifer@mayo.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether magnetic resonance imaging measurements observed 
in the Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) convenience sample 
differ from those observed in the Mayo Clinic Study of Aging (MCSA) 
population-based sample.
DESIGN: Comparison of 2 samples.
SETTING: Fifty-nine recruiting sites for the ADNI in the United States and 
Canada and the MCSA, a population-based cohort in Olmsted County, Minnesota.
PATIENTS: Cognitively normal subjects and amnestic subjects with mild cognitive 
impairment were selected from the ADNI convenience cohort and MCSA 
population-based cohort. A simple random sample of subjects from both cohorts in 
the same age range was selected, and a second sample applied matching for age, 
sex, educational level, apolipoprotein E genotype, and Mini-Mental State 
Examination score.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Baseline hippocampal volumes and annual percentage of 
decline in hippocampal volume.
RESULTS: In the population-based sample, MCSA subjects were older, had less 
education, performed worse on the Mini-Mental State Examination, and had a 
family history of Alzheimer disease less often than did ADNI subjects. Baseline 
hippocampal volumes were larger in ADNI compared with MCSA cognitively normal 
subjects in the random sample, although no differences were observed after 
matching. Rates of decline in hippocampal volume were greater in the ADNI 
compared with the MCSA for cognitively normal subjects and those with amnestic 
mild cognitive impairment, even after matching.
CONCLUSIONS: Rates of decline in hippocampal volume suggest that ADNI subjects 
have a more aggressive brain pathologic process than MCSA subjects and hence may 
not be representative of the general population. These findings have 
implications for treatment trials that use ADNI-like recruitment mechanisms and 
for studies validating new diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer disease in its 
various stages.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2011.3029
PMCID: PMC3569033
PMID: 22782510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2014 Oct;117(1):13-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2014.06.004. Epub 2014 Jun 14.

Analysis of sub-anatomic diffusion tensor imaging indices in white matter 
regions of Alzheimer with MMSE score.

Patil RB(1), Ramakrishnan S(2).

Author information:
(1)Non Invasive Imaging and Diagnostics Laboratory, Biomedical Engineering 
Group, Department of Applied Mechanics, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
Chennai 600036, India. Electronic address: ravipatil3354@gmail.com.
(2)Non Invasive Imaging and Diagnostics Laboratory, Biomedical Engineering 
Group, Department of Applied Mechanics, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
Chennai 600036, India. Electronic address: sramki@iitm.ac.in.

In this study, an attempt has been made to find the correlation between 
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) indices of white matter (WM) regions and mini 
mental state examination (MMSE) score of Alzheimer patients. Diffusion weighted 
images are obtained from the ADNI database. These are preprocessed for eddy 
current correction and removal of non-brain tissue. Fractional anisotropy (FA), 
mean diffusivity (MD), radial diffusivity (RD) and axial diffusivity (DA) 
indices are computed over significant regions (Fornix left, Splenium of corpus 
callosum left, Splenium of corpus callosum right, bilateral genu of the corpus 
callosum) affected by Alzheimer disease (AD) pathology. The correlation is 
computed between diffusion indices of the significant regions and MMSE score 
using linear fit technique so as to find the relation between clinical 
parameters and the image features. Binary classification has been employed using 
support vector machine, decision stumps and simple logistic classifiers on the 
extracted DTI indices along with MMSE score to classify Alzheimer patients from 
healthy controls. It is observed that distinct values of DTI indices exist for 
the range of MMSE score. However, there is no strong correlation (Pearson's 
correlation coefficient 'r' varies from 0.0383 to -0.1924) between the MMSE 
score and the diffusion indices over the significant regions. Further, the 
performance evaluation of classifiers shows 94% accuracy using SVM in 
differentiating AD and control. In isolation clinical and image features can be 
used for prescreening and diagnosis of AD but no sub anatomic region correlation 
exist between these features set. The discussion on the correlation of diffusion 
indices of WM with MMSE score is presented in this study.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2014.06.004
PMID: 24986110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2021 May 26;17:1659-1666. doi: 10.2147/NDT.S291020. 
eCollection 2021.

CSF TNF-α Levels Were Associated with Longitudinal Change in Brain Glucose 
Metabolism Among Non-Demented Older People.

Fu P(1), Zhu B(1), Huang Y(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Taizhou First People's Hospital, Taizhou, Zhejiang, 
People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: Emerging studies have suggested that tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
(TNF-α) is implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD), and that 
cerebral glucose hypometabolism is a key feature of AD. However, the association 
of CSF TNF-α levels with changes in cerebral glucose metabolism has not been 
studied among non-demented older people.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: At baseline, there were a total of 214 non-demented older 
people from Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) study. We 
examined the cross-sectional and longitudinal associations of CSF TNF-α with 
global cognition (as assessed by mini-mental state examination), verbal memory 
(as assessed by Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test-total learning score), and 
cerebral glucose metabolism (as measured by FDF-PET). Linear mixed-effects 
models were used to examine the longitudinal association of CSF TNF- α with 
change in each outcome over time with adjustment of age, educational level, 
gender, and APOE4 status.
RESULTS: In the cross-sectional study, CSF TNF-α was negatively associated with 
MMSE scores, but not verbal memory or FDG-PET. In the longitudinal study, higher 
CSF TNF- α at baseline was associated with a faster decline in cerebral glucose 
metabolism, but not MMSE scores or RAVLT total learning scores.
CONCLUSION: Higher CSF TNF-α levels were associated with a steeper decline in 
cerebral glucose metabolism among non-demented older people.

© 2021 Fu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/NDT.S291020
PMCID: PMC8165210
PMID: 34079263

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.


267. Ther Adv Neurol Disord. 2019 Mar 29;12:1756286419838682. doi: 
10.1177/1756286419838682. eCollection 2019.

Radiomics: a novel feature extraction method for brain neuron degeneration 
disease using (18)F-FDG PET imaging and its implementation for Alzheimer's 
disease and mild cognitive impairment.

Li Y(1), Jiang J(2), Lu J(3), Jiang J(1), Zhang H(3), Zuo C(3).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science, Shanghai 
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science, Shanghai 
University, T Building, 99 ShangDa Road, BaoShan District, Shanghai, 200444, 
China.
(3)PET Center, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of progressive and 
irreversible dementia, and accurate diagnosis of AD at its prodromal stage is 
clinically important. Currently, computer-aided diagnosis of AD and mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) using 18F-fluorodeoxy-glucose positron emission 
tomography (18F-FDG PET) imaging is usually based on low-level imaging features 
or deep learning methods, which have difficulties in achieving sufficient 
classification accuracy or lack clinical significance. This research therefore 
aimed to implement a new feature extraction method known as radiomics, to 
improve the classification accuracy and discover high-order features that can 
reveal pathological information.
METHODS: In this study, 18F-FDG PET and clinical assessments were collected in a 
cohort of 422 individuals [including 130 with AD, 130 with MCI, and 162 healthy 
controls (HCs)] from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and 
44 individuals (including 22 with AD, and 22 HCs) from Huashan Hospital, 
Shanghai, China. First, we performed a group comparison using a two-sample 
Student's t test to determine the regions of interest (ROIs) based on 30 AD 
patients and 30 HCs from ADNI cohorts. Second, based on two time scans of 32 HCs 
from ADNI cohorts, we used Cronbach's alpha coefficient for radiomic feature 
stability analyses. Pearson's correlation coefficients were regarded as a 
feature selection criterion, to select effective features associated with the 
clinical cognitive scale [clinical dementia rating scale in its sum of boxes 
(CDRSB); Alzheimer's disease assessment scale (ADAS)] with 500-times 
cross-validation. Finally, a support vector machine (SVM) was used to test the 
ability of the radiomic features to classify HCs, MCI and AD patients.
RESULTS: As a result, we identified brain regions which were mainly distributed 
in the temporal, occipital and frontal areas as ROIs. A total of 168 radiomic 
features of AD were stable (alpha > 0.8). The classification experiment led to 
maximal accuracies of 91.5%, 83.1% and 85.9% for classifying AD versus HC, MCI 
versus HCs and AD versus MCI.
CONCLUSION: The research in this paper proved that the novel approach based on 
high-order radiomic features extracted from 18F-FDG PET brain images that can be 
used for AD and MCI computer-aided diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1177/1756286419838682
PMCID: PMC6444412
PMID: 30956687

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest.


268. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2015 Sep 1;1(2):103-110. doi: 
10.1016/j.trci.2015.07.001.

Marked gender differences in progression of mild cognitive impairment over 8 
years.

Lin KA(1), Choudhury KR(2), Rathakrishnan BG(3), Marks DM(3), Petrella JR(2), 
Doraiswamy PM(1); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Duke University Medical Center, 2301 Erwin Road, 
Durham, NC 27710 ; Duke Institute for Brain Sciences, Duke University, Box 
91003, Levine Science Research Center, Room B107, 450 Research Drive, Durham, 
North Carolina 27708.
(2)Department of Radiology, Duke University Medical Center, Box 3808, 2301 Erwin 
Road, Durham, NC 27710.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Duke University Medical Center, 2301 Erwin Road, 
Durham, NC 27710.

INTRODUCTION: This study examined whether, among subjects with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), women progressed at faster rates than men.
METHODS: We examine longitudinal rates of change from baseline in 398 MCI 
subjects (141 Females, 257 Males) in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative-1 (ADNI-1), followed for up to 8 years (mean 4.1±2.5 years) using 
mixed effects models incorporating all follow ups (mean 8±4 visits).
RESULTS: Women progressed at faster rates than men on ADAS-Cog (p=0.001) and 
CDR-SB (p=0.003). Quadratic fit for change over time was significant for both 
ADAS-Cog (p=0.001) and CDR-SB (p=0.004), and the additional acceleration in 
women was 100% for ADAS-Cog and 143% for CDR-SB. The variability of change was 
greater in women. The gender effect was greater in ApoE4 carriers.
DISCUSSION: Women with MCI have greater longitudinal rates of cognitive and 
functional progression than men. Studies to confirm and uncover potential 
mechanisms appear to be warranted.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trci.2015.07.001
PMCID: PMC4593067
PMID: 26451386


269. Neuroimage. 2010 Jul 15;51(4):1405-13. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.03.051. 
Epub 2010 Mar 25.

Predicting clinical scores from magnetic resonance scans in Alzheimer's disease.

Stonnington CM(1), Chu C, Klöppel S, Jack CR Jr, Ashburner J, Frackowiak RS; 
Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ , USA. 
stonnington.cynthia@mayo.edu

Machine learning and pattern recognition methods have been used to diagnose 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) from individual MRI 
scans. Another application of such methods is to predict clinical scores from 
individual scans. Using relevance vector regression (RVR), we predicted 
individuals' performances on established tests from their MRI T1 weighted image 
in two independent data sets. From Mayo Clinic, 73 probable AD patients and 91 
cognitively normal (CN) controls completed the Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE), Dementia Rating Scale (DRS), and Auditory Verbal Learning Test (AVLT) 
within 3months of their scan. Baseline MRI's from the Alzheimer's disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) comprised the other data set; 113 AD, 351 MCI, 
and 122 CN subjects completed the MMSE and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-Cognitive subtest (ADAS-cog) and 39 AD, 92 MCI, and 32 CN ADNI subjects 
completed MMSE, ADAS-cog, and AVLT. Predicted and actual clinical scores were 
highly correlated for the MMSE, DRS, and ADAS-cog tests (P<0.0001). Training 
with one data set and testing with another demonstrated stability between data 
sets. DRS, MMSE, and ADAS-Cog correlated better than AVLT with whole brain grey 
matter changes associated with AD. This result underscores their utility for 
screening and tracking disease. RVR offers a novel way to measure interactions 
between structural changes and neuropsychological tests beyond that of 
univariate methods. In clinical practice, we envision using RVR to aid in 
diagnosis and predict clinical outcome.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.03.051
PMCID: PMC2871976
PMID: 20347044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest or 
financial involvement with this manuscript.


270. Neuroinformatics. 2017 Apr;15(2):215-226. doi: 10.1007/s12021-017-9326-0.

A Comparison of Accelerated and Non-accelerated MRI Scans for Brain Volume and 
Boundary Shift Integral Measures of Volume Change: Evidence from the ADNI 
Dataset.

Manning EN(1), Leung KK(2), Nicholas JM(3), Malone IB(2), Cardoso MJ(2)(4), 
Schott JM(2), Fox NC(2), Barnes J(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Dementia Research Centre, Institute of Neurology, University College London, 
London, UK. e.manning@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Dementia Research Centre, Institute of Neurology, University College London, 
London, UK.
(3)Department of Medical Statistics, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine, London, UK.
(4)Centre for Medical Image Computing, University College London, London, UK.

The aim of this study was to assess whether the use of accelerated MRI scans in 
place of non-accelerated scans influenced brain volume and atrophy rate measures 
in controls and subjects with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease. 
We used data from 861 subjects at baseline, 573 subjects at 6 months and 384 
subjects at 12 months from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI). We calculated whole-brain, ventricular and hippocampal atrophy rates 
using the k-means boundary shift integral (BSI). Scan quality was visually 
assessed and the proportion of good quality accelerated and non-accelerated 
scans compared. We also compared MMSE scores, vascular burden and age between 
subjects with poor quality scans with those with good quality scans. Finally, we 
estimated sample size requirements for a hypothetical clinical trial when using 
atrophy rates from accelerated scans and non-accelerated scans. No significant 
differences in whole-brain, ventricular and hippocampal volumes and atrophy 
rates were found between accelerated and non-accelerated scans. Twice as many 
non-accelerated scan pairs suffered from at least some motion artefacts compared 
with accelerated scan pairs (p ≤ 0.001), which may influence the BSI. Subjects 
whose accelerated scans had significant motion had a higher mean vascular burden 
and age (p ≤ 0.05) whilst subjects whose non-accelerated scans had significant 
motion had poorer MMSE scores (p ≤ 0.05). No difference in estimated sample size 
requirements was found when using accelerated vs. non-accelerated scans. 
Accelerated scans reduce scan time and are better tolerated. Therefore it may be 
advantageous to use accelerated over non-accelerated scans in clinical trials 
that use ADNI-type protocols, especially in more cognitively impaired subjects.

DOI: 10.1007/s12021-017-9326-0
PMCID: PMC5443885
PMID: 28316055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Front Neurosci. 2018 Aug 21;12:576. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00576. eCollection 
2018.

MRI Asymmetry Index of Hippocampal Subfields Increases Through the Continuum 
From the Mild Cognitive Impairment to the Alzheimer's Disease.

Sarica A(1), Vasta R(1), Novellino F(2), Vaccaro MG(1), Cerasa A(2)(3), 
Quattrone A(1)(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Centre, Magna Graecia University, Catanzaro, Italy.
(2)Neuroimaging Research Unit, Institute of Molecular Bioimaging and Physiology, 
National Research Council, Catanzaro, Italy.
(3)S. Anna Institute and Research in Advanced Neurorehabilitation, Crotone, 
Italy.

Objective: It is well-known that the hippocampus presents significant asymmetry 
in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and that difference in volumes between left and 
right exists and varies with disease progression. However, few works 
investigated whether the asymmetry degree of subfields of hippocampus changes 
through the continuum from Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) to AD. Thus, aim of 
the present work was to evaluate the Asymmetry Index (AI) of hippocampal 
substructures as possible MRI biomarkers of Dementia. Moreover, we aimed to 
assess whether the subfields presented peculiar differences between left and 
right hemispheres. We also investigated the relationship between the asymmetry 
magnitude in hippocampal subfields and the decline of verbal memory as assessed 
by Rey's auditory verbal learning test (RAVLT). Methods: Four-hundred subjects 
were selected from ADNI, equally divided into healthy controls (HC), AD, stable 
MCI (sMCI), and progressive MCI (pMCI). The structural baseline T1s were 
processed with FreeSurfer 6.0 and volumes of whole hippocampus (WH) and 12 
subfields were extracted. The AI was calculated as: 
(|Left-Right|/(Left+Right))*100. ANCOVA was used for evaluating AI differences 
between diagnoses, while paired t-test was applied for assessing changes between 
left and right volumes, separately for each group. Partial correlation was 
performed for exploring relationship between RAVLT summary scores (Immediate, 
Learning, Forgetting, Percent Forgetting) and hippocampal substructures AI. The 
statistical threshold was Bonferroni corrected p < 0.05/13 = 0.0038. Results: We 
found a general trend of increased degree of asymmetry with increasing severity 
of diagnosis. Indeed, AD presented the higher magnitude of asymmetry compared 
with HC, sMCI and pMCI, in the WH (AI mean 5.13 ± 4.29 SD) and in each of its 
twelve subfields. Moreover, we found in AD a significant negative correlation (r 
= -0.33, p = 0.00065) between the AI of parasubiculum (mean 12.70 ± 9.59 SD) and 
the RAVLT Learning score (mean 1.70 ± 1.62 SD). Conclusions: Our findings showed 
that hippocampal subfields AI varies differently among the four groups HC, sMCI, 
pMCI, and AD. Moreover, we found-for the first time-that hippocampal 
substructures had different sub-patterns of lateralization compared with the 
whole hippocampus. Importantly, the severity in learning rate was correlated 
with pathological high degree of asymmetry in parasubiculum of AD patients.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00576
PMCID: PMC6111896
PMID: 30186103


272. Cogn Neurodyn. 2019 Dec;13(6):513-518. doi: 10.1007/s11571-019-09536-x. Epub 
2019 May 11.

Regulating effect of CBF on memory in cognitively normal older adults with 
different ApoE genotype: the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Wang J(1), Peng G(1), Liu P(1), Tan X(1), Luo B(1)(2); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of School of 
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310003 China.
(2)Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Hangzhou, 310003 China.

Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) ε4 allele and cerebral blood flow (CBF) changes are 
related to the increased risk of cognitive impairment independently. However, 
whether there are interactions between ApoE ε4 and CBF on memory performance in 
older adults with normal cognition remains unknown. This study determined 
whether the association between CBF and memory performance could be moderated by 
ApoE ε4 within a sample of cognitively normal older adults from the ADNI. 62 
participants, including 23 with ApoE ε4 (ApoE ε4+) and 39 without ApoE ε4 (ApoE 
ε4-), underwent resting CBF measurement and memory testing. CBF was measured by 
arterial spin labeling MRI and memory performance was evaluated by the Rey 
Auditory Verbal Learning Test. By using linear regression models, CBF was 
negatively associated with memory function in ApoE ε4+ group, whereas positively 
in ApoE ε4- group by contrast. This study suggests that different CBF-memory 
relationships can be detected in cognitively normal ApoE ε4 carriers compared to 
ApoE ε4 non-carriers. Associations between hyperperfusion and worse memory 
performance in ApoE ε4 carriers may reflect vascular and/or cellular 
dysfunction.

© Springer Nature B.V. 2019.

DOI: 10.1007/s11571-019-09536-x
PMCID: PMC6825072
PMID: 31741688

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


273. Brain Behav. 2024 Jul;14(7):e3611. doi: 10.1002/brb3.3611.

Choroid plexus volumes and auditory verbal learning scores are associated with 
conversion from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease.

Pearson MJ(1), Wagstaff R(1), Williams RJ(1); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health, Charles Darwin University, Darwin, Northern Territory, 
Australia.

PURPOSE: Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) can be the prodromal phase of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) where appropriate intervention might prevent or delay 
conversion to AD. Given this, there has been increasing interest in using 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and neuropsychological testing to predict 
conversion from MCI to AD. Recent evidence suggests that the choroid plexus 
(ChP), neural substrates implicated in brain clearance, undergo volumetric 
changes in MCI and AD. Whether the ChP is involved in memory changes observed in 
MCI and can be used to predict conversion from MCI to AD has not been explored.
METHOD: The current study used data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) database to investigate whether later progression from MCI to 
AD (progressive MCI [pMCI], n = 115) or stable MCI (sMCI, n = 338) was 
associated with memory scores using the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test 
(RAVLT) and ChP volumes as calculated from MRI. Classification analyses 
identifying pMCI or sMCI group membership were performed to compare the 
predictive ability of the RAVLT and ChP volumes.
FINDING: The results indicated a significant difference between pMCI and sMCI 
groups for right ChP volume, with the pMCI group showing significantly larger 
right ChP volume (p = .01, 95% confidence interval [-.116, -.015]). A 
significant linear relationship between the RAVLT scores and right ChP volume 
was found across all participants, but not for the two groups separately. 
Classification analyses showed that a combination of left ChP volume and 
auditory verbal learning scores resulted in the most accurate classification 
performance, with group membership accurately predicted for 72% of the testing 
data.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that volumetric ChP changes appear to occur 
before the onset of AD and might provide value in predicting conversion from MCI 
to AD.

© 2024 The Author(s). Brain and Behavior published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.3611
PMCID: PMC11219301
PMID: 38956818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Res Sq [Preprint]. 2024 Nov 27:rs.3.rs-5423573. doi: 
10.21203/rs.3.rs-5423573/v1.

DNA Methylation Signature of a Lifestyle-based Resilience Index for Cognitive 
Health.

Zhang W(1), Lukacsovich D(1), Young JI(2)(3), Gomez L(3), Schmidt MA(2)(3), 
Martin ER(2)(3), Kunkle BW(2)(3), Chen X(1)(4), O'Shea DM(4), Galvin JE(4), Wang 
L(1)(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Sciences, University 
of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(2)Dr. John T Macdonald Foundation Department of Human Genetics, University of 
Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(3)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(4)Comprehensive Center for Brain Health, Department of Neurology, University of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33433, USA.
(5)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miller School of 
Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Cognitive resilience (CR) contributes to the variability in risk for developing 
and progressing in Alzheimer's disease (AD) among individuals. Beyond genetics, 
recent studies highlight the critical role of lifestyle factors in enhancing CR 
and delaying cognitive decline. DNA methylation (DNAm), an epigenetic mechanism 
influenced by both genetic and environmental factors, including CR-related 
lifestyle factors, offers a promising pathway for understanding the biology of 
CR. We studied DNAm changes associated with the Resilience Index (RI), a 
composite measure of lifestyle factors, using blood samples from the Healthy 
Brain Initiative (HBI) cohort. After corrections for multiple comparisons, our 
analysis identified 19 CpGs and 24 differentially methylated regions 
significantly associated with the RI, adjusting for covariates age, sex, APOE 
ε4, and immune cell composition. The RI-associated methylation changes are 
significantly enriched in pathways related to lipid metabolism, synaptic 
plasticity, and neuroinflammation, and highlight the connection between 
cardiovascular health and cognitive function. By identifying RI-associated DNAm, 
our study provided an alternative approach to discovering future targets and 
treatment strategies for AD, complementary to the traditional approach of 
identifying disease-associated variants directly. Furthermore, we developed a 
Methylation-based Resilience Score (MRS) that successfully predicted future 
cognitive decline in an external dataset from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), even after accounting for age, sex, APOE ε4, 
years of education, baseline diagnosis, and baseline MMSE score. Our findings 
are particularly relevant for a better understanding of epigenetic architecture 
underlying cognitive resilience. Importantly, the significant association 
between baseline MRS and future cognitive decline demonstrated that DNAm could 
be a predictive marker for AD, laying the foundation for future studies on 
personalized AD prevention.

DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-5423573/v1
PMCID: PMC11623774
PMID: 39649166

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest. Additional Declarations: There is NO Competing 
Interest.


275. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2018 Aug 16;10(1):80. doi: 10.1186/s13195-018-0407-6.

Cerebrospinal fluid synaptosomal-associated protein 25 is a key player in 
synaptic degeneration in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease.

Zhang H(1), Therriault J(2), Kang MS(2), Ng KP(3), Pascoal TA(2), Rosa-Neto 
P(2), Gauthier S(4); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, 400016, China.
(2)The McGill University Research Centre for Studies in Aging, McGill 
University, Montreal, Canada.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(4)The McGill University Research Centre for Studies in Aging, McGill 
University, Montreal, Canada. serge.gauthier@mcgill.ca.

BACKGROUND: There is accumulating evidence that synaptic loss precedes neuronal 
loss and correlates best with impaired memory formation in Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) synaptosomal-associated protein 25 (SNAP-25) is 
a newly discovered marker indicating synaptic damage. We here test CSF SNAP-25 
and SNAP-25/amyloid-β42 (Aβ42) ratio as a diagnostic marker for predicting 
cognitive decline and brain structural change in the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database.
METHODS: We stratified 139 participants from the ADNI database into cognitively 
normal (CN; n = 52), stable mild cognitive impairment (sMCI; n = 22), 
progressive MCI (pMCI; n = 47), and dementia due to AD (n = 18). Spearman 
correlation was performed to test the relationships between biomarkers. Overall 
diagnostic accuracy (area under the curve (AUC)) was obtained from receiver 
operating curve (ROC) analyses. Cox proportional hazard models tested the effect 
of CSF SNAP-25 and SNAP-25/Aβ42 measures on the conversion from MCI to AD. 
Relationships between the CSF SNAP-25 levels, SNAP-25/Aβ42 ratio, and diagnostic 
groups were tested with linear regressions. Linear mixed-effects models and 
linear regression models were used to evaluate CSF SNAP-25 and SNAP-25/Aβ42 as 
predictors of AD features, including cognition measured by the Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) and brain structure and white matter hyperintensity (WMH) 
measured by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
RESULTS: CSF SNAP-25 and SNAP-25/Aβ42 were increased in patients with pMCI and 
AD compared with CN, and in pMCI and AD compared with sMCI. Cognitively normal 
subjects who progressed to MCI or AD during follow-up had increased SNAP-25/Aβ42 
ratio compared with nonprogressors. CSF SNAP-25, especially SNAP-25/Aβ42, offers 
diagnostic utility for pMCI and AD. CSF SNAP-25 and SNAP-25/Aβ42 significantly 
predicted conversion from MCI to AD. In addition, elevated SNAP-25/Aβ42 ratio 
was associated with the rate of hippocampal atrophy in pMCI and the rate of 
change of cognitive impairment in CN over the follow-up period.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that both CSF SNAP-25 and SNAP-25/Aβ42 ratio are 
already increased at the early clinical stage of AD, and indicate the promise of 
CSF SNAP-25 and SNAP-25/Aβ42 ratio as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers for 
the earliest symptomatic stage of AD.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-018-0407-6
PMCID: PMC6097333
PMID: 30115118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
ADNI study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of all the 
participating institutions. Informed written consent was obtained from all 
subjects at each center. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: All authors approved the final 
manuscript for submission and gave consent for publication. COMPETING INTERESTS: 
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.


276. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Oct;20(10):7274-7280. doi: 10.1002/alz.14213. Epub 2024 
Sep 11.

Predicting CDR status over 36 months with a recall-based digital cognitive 
biomarker.

Bruno D(1), Jauregi-Zinkunegi A(1), Bock JR(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, UK.
(2)Embic Corporation, Newport Beach, California, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Word-list recall tests are routinely used for cognitive 
assessment, and process scoring may improve their accuracy. We examined whether 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog) derived, 
process-based digital cognitive biomarkers (DCBs) at baseline predicted Clinical 
Dementia Rating (CDR) longitudinally and compared them to standard metrics.
METHODS: Analyses were performed with Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) data from 330 participants (mean age = 71.4 ± 7.2). We 
conducted regression analyses predicting CDR at 36 months, controlling for 
demographics and genetic risk, with ADAS-Cog traditional scores and DCBs as 
predictors.
RESULTS: The best predictor of CDR at 36 months was M, a DCB reflecting recall 
ability (area under the curve = 0.84), outperforming traditional scores. 
Diagnostic results suggest that M may be particularly useful to identify 
individuals who are unlikely to decline.
DISCUSSION: These results suggest that M outperforms ADAS-Cog traditional 
metrics and supports process scoring for word-list recall tests. More research 
is needed to determine further applicability with other tests and populations.
HIGHLIGHTS: Process scoring and latent modeling were more effective than 
traditional scoring. Latent recall ability (M) was the best predictor of 
Clinical Dementia Rating decline at 36 months. The top digital cognitive 
biomarker model had odds ≈ 90 times greater than the top Alzheimer's Disease 
Assessment Scale-Cognitive subscale model. Particularly high negative predictive 
value supports literature on cognitive testing as a useful screen. Consideration 
of both cognitive and pathological outcomes is needed.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14213
PMCID: PMC11485075
PMID: 39258756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: D.B. and A.J.Z. have no conflicts of interest. 
J.R.B. is an employee of Embic Corporation whose assessment outcomes were 
evaluated in this project. Author disclosures are available in the supporting 
information.


277. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2012 Dec;9(10):1135-41. doi: 10.2174/156720512804142976.

Biomarker positive and negative subjects in the ADNI cohort: clinical 
characterization.

Kennedy RE(1), Schneider LS, Cutter GR; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, 1665 University Blvd, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. 
rkennedy@ms.soph.uab.edu

BACKGROUND: The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) was created 
to develop standards for brain imaging and biomarkers for diagnosis and 
treatment trials. Using the ADNI dataset, experts have found that low 
cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-β1-42 (CSF Aβ1-42) concentration and high 
total-tau/Aβ1-42 ratio are highly predictive of progression in amnestic mild 
cognitive impairment (aMCI), and recommended these biomarkers to support the 
diagnosis of prodromal Alzheimer's disease and select patients for clinical 
trials. However, biomarker selection criteria may introduce systematic bias that 
undermines their utility.
METHODS: We tested for systematic biases among individuals undergoing lumbar 
puncture in the ADNI dataset who fulfilled the following entry criteria: (1) 
aMCI with CSF Aβ1-42 ≤ 192 pG/mL, compared to aMCI with Aβ1-42 > 192 pG/mL, and 
(2) aMCI with total-tau/Aβ1-42 > 0.39, compared to aMCI with total-tau/Aβ1-42 ≤ 
0.39, as well as comparisons between participants with aMCI with and without 
lumbar puncture.
FINDINGS: Individuals with low CSF Aβ1-42 scored significantly poorer than 
individuals with high Aβ1-42 on several baseline measures of disease severity, 
including Logical Memory II (3.24 vs 4.73; p < 0.001), Functional Activities 
Questionnaire (4.30 vs 2.37; p < 0.001), and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-cognitive (12.23 vs 10.09; p=0.002). Similar results were found using high 
total-tau/Aβ1-42. No differences were found for individuals with and without 
lumbar puncture except for marital status.
INTERPRETATIONS: Individuals with aMCI with low Aβ1-42 in the ADNI dataset 
appear to have more advanced disease than those with high Aβ1-42. Selection 
criteria based on ADNI, as well as design of future studies, must account for 
potential confounds between biomarker status and disease severity to ensure that 
the former, and not the latter, is the true determinant of predictive accuracy.

DOI: 10.2174/156720512804142976
PMID: 22963265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Sci Rep. 2019 Dec 13;9(1):19024. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-54204-z.

Predicting clinical decline and conversion to Alzheimer's disease or dementia 
using novel Elecsys Aβ(1-42), pTau and tTau CSF immunoassays.

Blennow K(1)(2), Shaw LM(3), Stomrud E(4)(5), Mattsson N(4)(6), Toledo JB(3)(7), 
Buck K(8), Wahl S(8), Eichenlaub U(8), Lifke V(8), Simon M(9), Trojanowski 
JQ(3), Hansson O(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, 
Sweden.
(2)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Department of Psychiatry and 
Neurochemistry, The Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
(5)Memory Clinic, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
(6)Wallenberg Center for Molecular Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(7)Department of Neurology, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(8)Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Penzberg, Germany.
(9)Roche Diagnostics International Ltd, Rotkreuz, Switzerland.
(10)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. 
oskar.hansson@med.lu.se.
(11)Memory Clinic, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden. 
oskar.hansson@med.lu.se.

We evaluated the performance of CSF biomarkers for predicting risk of clinical 
decline and conversion to dementia in non-demented patients with cognitive 
symptoms. CSF samples from patients in two multicentre longitudinal studies 
(ADNI, n = 619; BioFINDER, n = 431) were analysed. Aβ(1-42), tTau and pTau CSF 
concentrations were measured using Elecsys CSF immunoassays, and tTau/Aβ(1-42) 
and pTau/Aβ(1-42) ratios calculated. Patients were classified as biomarker 
(BM)-positive or BM-negative at baseline. Ability of biomarkers to predict risk 
of clinical decline and conversion to AD/dementia was assessed using 
pre-established cut-offs for Aβ(1-42) and ratios; tTau and pTau cut-offs were 
determined. BM-positive patients showed greater clinical decline than 
BM-negative patients, demonstrated by greater decreases in MMSE scores (all 
biomarkers: -2.10 to -0.70). Risk of conversion to AD/dementia was higher in 
BM-positive patients (HR: 1.67 to 11.48). Performance of Tau/Aβ(1-42) ratios was 
superior to single biomarkers, and consistent even when using cut-offs derived 
in a different cohort. Optimal pTau and tTau cut-offs were approximately 
27 pg/mL and 300 pg/mL in both BioFINDER and ADNI. Elecsys pTau/Aβ(1-42) and 
tTau/Aβ(1-42) are robust biomarkers for predicting risk of clinical decline and 
conversion to dementia in non-demented patients, and may support AD diagnosis in 
clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-54204-z
PMCID: PMC6911086
PMID: 31836810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: K.B. served as a consultant or at advisory 
boards for Alzheon, BioArctic, Roche Diagnostics, Eli Lilly, Fujirebio Europe, 
Merck, Novartis and IBL International. His research team has received funds for 
research from Roche Diagnostics. He is the co-founder of Brain Biomarker 
Solutions in Gothenburg AB, a GU Venture-based platform company at the 
University of Gothenburg. L.M.S. received research support from NIH/NIA, ADNI 
(AG024904) and UPenn ADCC Biomarker Core (AG010124), MJFox Foundation for PD 
research, Roche, Lilly; provides QC oversight for Roche Elecsys CSF AD biomarker 
immunoassays for ADNI; and is a consultant for Roche, Lilly, Novartis. E.S., 
N.M., J.B.T. and J.Q.T. declare that they have no conflict of interest. S.W., 
U.E., V.L., M.S., and K.Bu. are Roche employees. O.H. acquired research support 
(for the institution) from Roche, GE Healthcare, Biogen, AVID 
Radiopharmaceuticals, Fujirebio and Euroimmun. In the past 2 years, he has 
received consultancy/speaker fees (paid to the institution) from Lilly, Roche 
and Fujirebio.


279. Neuroimage Clin. 2018 Apr 16;19:190-201. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2018.04.016. 
eCollection 2018.

Longitudinal structural cerebral changes related to core CSF biomarkers in 
preclinical Alzheimer's disease: A study of two independent datasets.

Falcon C(1), Tucholka A(2), Monté-Rubio GC(3), Cacciaglia R(2), Operto G(2), 
Rami L(4), Gispert JD(5), Molinuevo JL(6); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center, Pasqual Maragall Foundation, Barcelona, 
Spain; CIBER-BBN, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center, Pasqual Maragall Foundation, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(3)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain; Neurology Department, Hospital Clínic i Provincial de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center, Pasqual Maragall Foundation, Barcelona, 
Spain; CIBER-BBN, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: 
jdgispert@barcelobabeta.org.
(6)Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center, Pasqual Maragall Foundation, Barcelona, 
Spain; Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain; Neurology Department, Hospital Clínic i Provincial de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; CIBER Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable 
(CIBERFES), Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: jlmolinuevo@barcelonabeta.org.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by an accumulation of β-amyloid (Aβ42) 
accompanied by brain atrophy and cognitive decline. Several recent studies have 
shown that Aβ42 accumulation is associated with gray matter (GM) changes prior 
to the development of cognitive impairment, in the so-called preclinical stage 
of the AD (pre-AD). It also has been proved that the GM atrophy profile is not 
linear, both in normal ageing but, especially, on AD. However, several other 
factors may influence this association and may have an impact on the 
generalization of results from different samples. In this work, we estimate 
differences in rates of GM volume change in cognitively healthy elders in 
association with baseline core cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) AD biomarkers, and 
assess to what these differences are sample dependent. We report the dependence 
of atrophy rates, measured in a two-year interval, on Aβ42, computed both over 
continuous and categorical values of Aβ42, at voxel-level (p < 0.001; k < 100) 
and corrected for sex, age and education. Analyses were performed jointly and 
separately, on two samples. The first sample was formed of 31 individuals (22 
Ctrl and 9 pre-AD), aged 60-80 and recruited at the Hospital Clinic of 
Barcelona. The second sample was a replica of the first one with subjects 
selected from the ADNI dataset. We also investigated the dependence of the GM 
atrophy rate on the basal levels of continuous p-tau and on the p-tau/Aβ42 
ratio. Correlation analyses on the whole sample showed a dependence of GM 
atrophy rates on Aβ42 in medial and orbital frontal, precuneus, cingulate, 
medial temporal regions and cerebellum. Correlations with p-tau were located in 
the left hippocampus, parahippocampus and striatal nuclei whereas correlation 
with p-tau/Aβ42 was mainly found in ventral and medial temporal areas. Regarding 
analyses performed separately, we found a substantial discrepancy of results 
between samples, illustrating the complexities of comparing two independent 
datasets even when using the same inclusion criteria. Such discrepancies may 
lead to significant differences in the sample size needed to detect a particular 
reduction on cerebral atrophy rates in prevention trials. Higher cognitive 
reserve and more advanced pathological progression in the ADNI sample could 
partially account for the observed discrepancies. Taken together, our findings 
in these two samples highlight the importance of comparing and merging 
independent datasets to draw more robust and generalizable conclusions on the 
structural changes in the preclinical stages of AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2018.04.016
PMCID: PMC6050455
PMID: 30023169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Sci Rep. 2016 Oct 5;6:34567. doi: 10.1038/srep34567.

COMPASS: A computational model to predict changes in MMSE scores 24-months after 
initial assessment of Alzheimer's disease.

Zhu F(1), Panwar B(1), Dodge HH(2)(3), Li H(1), Hampstead BM(4)(5), Albin 
RL(2)(6)(7), Paulson HL(2), Guan Y(1)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of 
Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology and Michigan Alzheimer's Disease Center, University 
of Michigan, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology and Layton Aging and Alzheimer's Disease Center, 
Oregon Health &Science University, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Michigan, USA.
(5)Mental Health Service, VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System, USA.
(6)Neurology Service &Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Centers, VA Ann 
Arbor Healthcare System, USA.
(7)University of Michigan Udall Center, USA.
(8)Departments of Internal Medicine and Human Genetics, and School of Public 
Health, University of Michigan, USA.
(9)Departments of Internal Medicine and of Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science, University of Michigan, USA.

We present COMPASS, a COmputational Model to Predict the development of 
Alzheimer's diSease Spectrum, to model Alzheimer's disease (AD) progression. 
This was the best-performing method in recent crowdsourcing benchmark study, 
DREAM Alzheimer's Disease Big Data challenge to predict changes in Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE) scores over 24-months using standardized data. In the 
present study, we conducted three additional analyses beyond the DREAM challenge 
question to improve the clinical contribution of our approach, including: (1) 
adding pre-validated baseline cognitive composite scores of ADNI-MEM and 
ADNI-EF, (2) identifying subjects with significant declines in MMSE scores, and 
(3) incorporating SNPs of top 10 genes connected to APOE identified from 
functional-relationship network. For (1) above, we significantly improved 
predictive accuracy, especially for the Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) group. 
For (2), we achieved an area under ROC of 0.814 in predicting significant MMSE 
decline: our model has 100% precision at 5% recall, and 91% accuracy at 10% 
recall. For (3), "genetic only" model has Pearson's correlation of 0.15 to 
predict progression in the MCI group. Even though addition of this limited 
genetic model to COMPASS did not improve prediction of progression of MCI group, 
the predictive ability of SNP information extended beyond well-known APOE 
allele.

DOI: 10.1038/srep34567
PMCID: PMC5050516
PMID: 27703197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2025 Feb;129:105659. doi: 10.1016/j.archger.2024.105659. 
Epub 2024 Oct 13.

Longitudinal trajectories of general cognitive and daily functions in 
data-driven subtypes of MCI: A longitudinal cohort analysis of older adults.

Long X(1), Yuan M(1), Zhang Z(1), Fang Y(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Health Technology Assessment of Fujian Province, School of 
Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China; Center for Aging and Health 
Research, School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Health Technology Assessment of Fujian Province, School of 
Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China; Center for Aging and Health 
Research, School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. Electronic 
address: fangya@xmu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVES: To derive data-driven subtypes of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
and characterize the complicated changes of general cognitive and daily 
functions over time in MCI subtypes.
METHODS: A total of 813 subjects diagnosed as MCI at baseline from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) were included. Data-driven 
MCI subtypes were derived from group-based multi-trajectory modeling (GBMTM) 
analyses using longitudinal measurement scores in the cognitive domains of 
visuospatial function, language, and executive function. General cognitive and 
daily functions were measured by the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and 
the Functional Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ), respectively, whose longitudinal 
trajectory changes were depicted by Linear mixed models.
RESULTS: Three MCI subtypes were derived, which were defined as "Cognitive 
decline group", "Mild cognitive decline group" and "No cognitive decline group". 
The "Mild cognitive decline group" had the highest percentage in the sample 
(46.2 %), followed by the "No cognitive decline group" (35.2 %). Patients in the 
"Cognitive decline group" had the highest mean age (74.69 years) at baseline, 
the highest APOE ε4 carriers (63.2 %), and the greatest dementia conversion rate 
(77.0 %). The changes in MMSE and FAQ score trajectories were fastest in the 
"Cognitive decline group" in the first 36 months and most slowly in the "No 
cognitive decline group".
CONCLUSION: MCI individuals could be subdivided into more fine-grained cognitive 
subtypes, and identifying these distinct MCI subtypes and their different 
trajectories of cognitive decline may have important prognostic value for 
improving clinical course prediction.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2024.105659
PMID: 39454276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors 
declare that they have no conflicts of interest.


282. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2017 Apr 26;9(1):32. doi: 10.1186/s13195-017-0260-z.

Comparison of CSF markers and semi-quantitative amyloid PET in Alzheimer's 
disease diagnosis and in cognitive impairment prognosis using the ADNI-2 
database.

Ben Bouallègue F(1)(2)(3), Mariano-Goulart D(4), Payoux P(5)(6); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Toulouse NeuroImaging Centre (ToNIC), Université de Toulouse, Inserm/UPS, 
Toulouse, France. faybenb@hotmail.com.
(2)Nuclear Medicine Department, Purpan University Hospital, Toulouse, France. 
faybenb@hotmail.com.
(3)Nuclear Medicine Department, Lapeyronie University Hospital, Montpellier, 
France. faybenb@hotmail.com.
(4)Nuclear Medicine Department, Lapeyronie University Hospital, Montpellier, 
France.
(5)Toulouse NeuroImaging Centre (ToNIC), Université de Toulouse, Inserm/UPS, 
Toulouse, France.
(6)Nuclear Medicine Department, Purpan University Hospital, Toulouse, France.

BACKGROUND: The relative performance of semi-quantitative amyloid positron 
emission tomography (PET) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) markers in diagnosing 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and predicting the cognitive evolution of patients with 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is still debated.
METHODS: Subjects from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2 with 
complete baseline cognitive assessment (Mini Mental State Examination, Clinical 
Dementia Rating [CDR] and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive 
Subscale [ADAS-cog] scores), CSF collection (amyloid-β1-42 [Aβ], tau and 
phosphorylated tau) and 18F-florbetapir scans were included in our 
cross-sectional cohort. Among these, patients with MCI or substantial memory 
complaints constituted our longitudinal cohort and were followed for 
30 ± 16 months. PET amyloid deposition was quantified using relative retention 
indices (standardised uptake value ratio [SUVr]) with respect to pontine, 
cerebellar and composite reference regions. Diagnostic and prognostic 
performance based on PET and CSF was evaluated using ROC analysis, multivariate 
linear regression and survival analysis with the Cox proportional hazards model.
RESULTS: The cross-sectional study included 677 participants and revealed that 
pontine and composite SUVr values were better classifiers (AUC 0.88, diagnostic 
accuracy 85%) than CSF markers (AUC 0.83 and 0.85, accuracy 80% and 75%, for Aβ 
and tau, respectively). SUVr was a strong independent determinant of cognition 
in multivariate regression, whereas Aβ was not; tau was also a determinant, but 
to a lesser degree. Among the 396 patients from the longitudinal study, 82 (21%) 
converted to AD within 22 ± 13 months. Optimal SUVr thresholds to differentiate 
AD converters were quite similar to those of the cross-sectional study. 
Composite SUVr was the best AD classifier (AUC 0.86, sensitivity 88%, 
specificity 81%). In multivariate regression, baseline cognition (CDR and 
ADAS-cog) was the main predictor of subsequent cognitive decline. Pontine and 
composite SUVr were moderate but independent predictors of final status and 
CDR/ADAS-cog progression rate, whereas baseline CSF markers had a marginal 
influence. The adjusted HRs for AD conversion were 3.8 (p = 0.01) for PET 
profile, 1.2 (p = ns) for Aβ profile and 1.8 (p = 0.03) for tau profile.
CONCLUSIONS: Semi-quantitative amyloid PET appears more powerful than CSF 
markers for AD grading and MCI prognosis in terms of cognitive decline and AD 
conversion.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-017-0260-z
PMCID: PMC5405503
PMID: 28441967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Neuroimage Clin. 2019;22:101786. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2019.101786. Epub 2019 Mar 
19.

Modeling grey matter atrophy as a function of time, aging or cognitive decline 
show different anatomical patterns in Alzheimer's disease.

Dicks E(1), Vermunt L(2), van der Flier WM(3), Visser PJ(4), Barkhof F(5), 
Scheltens P(6), Tijms BM(7); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: e.dicks@vumc.nl.
(2)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
l.vermunt@vumc.nl.
(3)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands. Electronic address: wm.vdflier@vumc.nl.
(4)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Psychiatry and 
Neuropsychology, School for Mental Health and Neuroscience, Alzheimer Centre 
Limburg, Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
PJ.Visser@vumc.nl.
(5)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Institutes of Neurology & Healthcare 
Engineering, UCL London, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
f.barkhof@vumc.nl.
(6)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
p.scheltens@vumc.nl.
(7)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: b.tijms@vumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Grey matter (GM) atrophy in Alzheimer's disease (AD) is most 
commonly modeled as a function of time. However, this approach does not take 
into account inter-individual differences in initial disease severity or changes 
due to aging. Here, we modeled GM atrophy within individuals across the AD 
clinical spectrum as a function of time, aging and MMSE, as a proxy for disease 
severity, and investigated how these models influence estimates of GM atrophy.
METHODS: We selected 523 individuals from ADNI (100 preclinical AD, 288 
prodromal AD, 135 AD dementia) with abnormal baseline amyloid PET/CSF and 
≥1 year of MRI follow-up. We calculated total and 90 regional GM volumes for 
2281 MRI scans (median [IQR]; 4 [3-5] scans per individual over 2 [1.6-4] years) 
and used linear mixed models to investigate atrophy as a function of time, aging 
and decline on MMSE. Analyses included clinical stage as interaction with the 
predictor and were corrected for baseline age, sex, education, field strength 
and total intracranial volume. We repeated analyses for a sample of participants 
with normal amyloid (n = 387) to assess whether associations were specific for 
amyloid pathology.
RESULTS: Using time or aging as predictors, amyloid abnormal participants 
annually declined -1.29 ± 0.08 points and - 0.28 ± 0.03 points respectively on 
the MMSE and -12.23 ± 0.47 cm3 and -8.87 ± 0.34 respectively in total GM volume 
(p < .001). For the time and age models atrophy was widespread and preclinical 
and prodromal AD showed similar atrophy patterns. Comparing prodromal AD to AD 
dementia, AD dementia showed faster atrophy mostly in temporal lobes as modeled 
with time, while prodromal AD showed faster atrophy in mostly frontoparietal 
areas as modeled with age (pFDR < 0.05). Modeling change in GM volume as a 
function of decline on MMSE, slopes were less steep compared to those based on 
time and aging (-4.1 ± 0.25 cm3 per MMSE point decline; p < .001) and showed 
steeper atrophy for prodromal AD compared to preclinical AD in the right 
inferior temporal gyrus (p < .05) and compared to AD dementia mostly in temporal 
areas (pFDR < 0.05). Associations with time, aging and MMSE remained when 
accounting for these effects in the other models, suggesting that all measures 
explain part of the variance in GM atrophy. Repeating analyses in amyloid normal 
individuals, effects for time and aging showed similar widespread anatomical 
patterns, while associations with MMSE were largely reduced.
CONCLUSION: Effects of time, aging and MMSE all explained variance in GM atrophy 
slopes within individuals. Associations with MMSE were weaker than those for 
time or age, but specific for amyloid pathology. This suggests that at least 
some of the atrophy observed in time or age models may not be specific to AD.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2019.101786
PMCID: PMC6439228
PMID: 30921610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Neurol Sci. 2024 Mar;45(3):1041-1050. doi: 10.1007/s10072-023-07076-1. Epub 2023 
Sep 28.

Association of APOE gene with longitudinal changes of CSF amyloid beta and tau 
levels in Alzheimer's disease: racial differences.

Xu C(1), Xiao D(2), Su BB(3), Saveron JM(1), Gamez D(1), Navia RO(4), Wang N(5), 
Roy U(1), Adjeroh DA(6), Wang K(7); Alzheimer and Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health and Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Professions, 
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, Brownsville, TX, 78520, USA.
(2)Department of STEM, School of Arts and Sciences, Regis College, Weston, MA, 
02493, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics - Allergy and Immunology, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine and Rockefeller Neuroscience Institute, West Virginia 
University, Morgantown, WV, 26506, USA.
(5)Department of Health Policy and Management, School of Public Health, 
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742, USA.
(6)Lane Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, West Virginia 
University, Morgantown, WV, 26506, USA.
(7)Department of Family and Community Health, School of Nursing, Health Sciences 
Center, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, 26506, USA. 
kesheng.wang@hsc.wvu.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele is a risk factor for 
late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, no investigation has focused on 
racial differences in the longitudinal effect of APOE genotypes on CSF amyloid 
beta (Aβ42) and tau levels in AD.
METHODS: This study used data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI): 222 participants with AD, 264 with cognitive normal (CN), and 
692 with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) at baseline and two years follow-up. We 
used a linear mixed model to investigate the effect of APOE-ε4-genotypes on 
longitudinal changes in the amyloid beta and tau levels.
RESULTS: Individuals with 1 or 2 APOE ε4 alleles revealed significantly higher 
t-Tau and p-Tau, but lower amyloid beta Aβ42 compared with individuals without 
APOE ε4 alleles. Significantly higher levels of log-t-Tau, log-p-Tau, and low 
levels of log-Aβ42 were observed in the subjects with older age, being female, 
and the two diagnostic groups (AD and MCI). The higher p-Tau and Aβ42 values are 
associated with poor Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) performance. 
Non-Hispanic Africa American (AA) and Hispanic participants were associated with 
decreased log-t-Tau levels (β =  - 0.154, p = 0.0112; β =  - 0.207, and 
p = 0.0016, respectively) as compared to those observed in Whites. Furthermore, 
Hispanic participants were associated with a decreased log-p-Tau level 
(β =  - 0.224, p = 0.0023) compared to those observed in Whites. There were no 
differences in Aβ42 level for non-Hispanic AA and Hispanic participants compared 
with White participants.
CONCLUSION: Our study, for the first time, showed that the APOE ε4 allele was 
associated with these biomarkers, however with differing degrees among racial 
groups.

© 2023. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-023-07076-1
PMID: 37759100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;61(1):373-388. doi: 10.3233/JAD-170705.

Prediction of Alzheimer's Dementia in Patients with Amnestic Mild Cognitive 
Impairment in Clinical Routine: Incremental Value of Biomarkers of 
Neurodegeneration and Brain Amyloidosis Added Stepwise to Cognitive Status.

Lange C(1)(2), Suppa P(1)(3), Pietrzyk U(2)(4), Makowski MR(5), Spies L(3), 
Peters O(6), Buchert R(1)(7); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany.
(2)School of Mathematics and Natural Science, University of Wuppertal, 
Wuppertal, Germany.
(3)jung diagnostics GmbH, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine, Forschungszentrum Jülich, Jülich, 
Germany.
(5)Department of Radiology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany.
(6)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Charité - Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, 
Center for Radiology and Endoscopy, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the incremental benefit of biomarkers for 
prediction of Alzheimer's disease dementia (ADD) in patients with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) when added stepwise in the order of their collection in 
clinical routine. The model started with cognitive status characterized by the 
ADAS-13 score. Hippocampus volume (HV), cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) phospho-tau 
(pTau), and the FDG t-sum score in an AD meta-region-of-interest were compared 
as neurodegeneration markers. CSF-Aβ1-42 was used as amyloidosis marker. The 
incremental prognostic benefit from these markers was assessed by stepwise 
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis in 402 ADNI MCI subjects. Predefined cutoffs were 
used to dichotomize patients as 'negative' or 'positive' for AD characteristic 
alteration with respect to each marker. Among the neurodegeneration markers, 
CSF-pTau provided the best incremental risk stratification when added to 
ADAS-13. FDG PET outperformed HV only in MCI subjects with relatively preserved 
cognition. Adding CSF-Aβ provided further risk stratification in pTau-positive 
subjects, independent of their cognitive status. Stepwise integration of 
biomarkers allows stepwise refinement of risk estimates for MCI-to-ADD 
progression. Incremental benefit strongly depends on the patient's status 
according to the preceding diagnostic steps. The stepwise Kaplan-Meier curves 
might be useful to optimize diagnostic workflow in individual patients.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-170705
PMID: 29154285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Front Neurosci. 2018 Apr 30;12:260. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00260. eCollection 
2018.

Combining Polygenic Hazard Score With Volumetric MRI and Cognitive Measures 
Improves Prediction of Progression From Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer's 
Disease.

Kauppi K(1)(2), Fan CC(1)(3), McEvoy LK(1), Holland D(4), Tan CH(5), Chen CH(1), 
Andreassen OA(6)(7), Desikan RS(5), Dale AM(1)(3)(4); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
United States.
(2)Department of Radiation Sciences, University of Umea, Umea, Sweden.
(3)Department of Cognitive Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA, United States.
(4)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, United States.
(5)Neuroradiology Section, Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States.
(6)NORMENT, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Division of Mental Health and 
Addiction, University of Oslo, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(7)Division of Mental Health and Addiction, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, 
Norway.

Improved prediction of progression to Alzheimer's Disease (AD) among older 
individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is of high clinical and 
societal importance. We recently developed a polygenic hazard score (PHS) that 
predicted age of AD onset above and beyond APOE. Here, we used data from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) to further explore the 
potential clinical utility of PHS for predicting AD development in older adults 
with MCI. We examined the predictive value of PHS alone and in combination with 
baseline structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data on performance on the 
Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE). In survival analyses, PHS significantly predicted 
time to progression from MCI to AD over 120 months (p = 1.07e-5), and PHS was 
significantly more predictive than APOE alone (p = 0.015). Combining PHS with 
baseline brain atrophy score and/or MMSE score significantly improved prediction 
compared to models without PHS (three-factor model p = 4.28e-17). Prediction 
model accuracies, sensitivities and area under the curve were also improved by 
including PHS in the model, compared to only using atrophy score and MMSE. 
Further, using linear mixed-effect modeling, PHS improved the prediction of 
change in the Clinical Dementia Rating-Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) score and MMSE over 
36 months in patients with MCI at baseline, beyond both APOE and baseline levels 
of brain atrophy. These results illustrate the potential clinical utility of PHS 
for assessment of risk for AD progression among individuals with MCI both alone, 
or in conjunction with clinical measures of prodromal disease including measures 
of cognitive function and regional brain atrophy.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00260
PMCID: PMC5937163
PMID: 29760643


287. Front Aging Neurosci. 2017 Mar 10;9:46. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00046. 
eCollection 2017.

Adding Recognition Discriminability Index to the Delayed Recall Is Useful to 
Predict Conversion from Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer's Disease in the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Russo MJ(1), Campos J(1), Vázquez S(1), Sevlever G(1), Allegri RF(1); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Shaw 
LM, Khachaturian Z, Sorensen G, Carrillo M, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies 
P, Fillit H, Hefti F, Holtzman D, Mesulam MM, Potter W, Snyder P, Schwartz A, 
Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, 
Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, Balasubramanian AB, Mason J, Sim I, Beckett L, 
Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, 
DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Vemuri P, Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward 
C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Morris 
JC, Cairns NJ, Franklin E, Taylor-Reinwald L, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, 
Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin 
S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Thal L, Khachaturian Z, Thal L, 
Buckholtz N, Weiner MW, Snyder PJ, Potter W, Paul S, Albert M, Frank R, 
Khachaturian Z, Hsiao J, Kaye J, Quinn J, Silbert L, Lind B, Carter R, Dolen S, 
Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Becerra M, Teodoro L, Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag 
H, Fleisher A, Heidebrink JL, Lord JL, Petersen R, Mason SS, Albers CS, Knopman 
D, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Pavlik V, Shibley V, Chowdhury M, 
Rountree S, Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Ances B, Morris JC, Carroll M, 
Creech ML, Franklin E, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Oliver A, Marson D, Geldmacher D, 
Natelson Love M, Griffith R, Clark D, Brockington J, Roberson E, Grossman H, 
Mitsis E, Shah RC, deToledo-Morrell L, Duara R, Greig-Custo MT, Barker W, Albert 
M, Onyike C, D'Agostino D 2nd, Kielb S, Sadowski M, Sheikh MO, Anaztasia U, 
Mrunalini G, Doraiswamy PM, Petrella JR, Borges-Neto S, Wong TZ, Coleman E, 
Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk DA, Clark CM, Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, Sinha P, 
Oates E, Conrad G, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein 
BS, Martin K, Makino KM, Ismail MS, Brand C, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, 
Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Swerdlow 
RH, Brooks WM, Apostolova L, Tingus K, Woo E, Silverman DH, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, 
Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Poki-Walker K, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews BR, 
Brosch JR, Herring S, van Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Varma P, Chertkow H, 
Bergman H, Hosein C, Black S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GR, Mudge B, 
Sossi V, Feldman H, Assaly M, Finger E, Pasternack S, Rachisky I, Trost D, 
Kertesz A, Bernick C, Munic D, Mesulam MM, Rogalski E, Lipowski K, Weintraub S, 
Bonakdarpour B, Kerwin D, Wu CK, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, Villena T, Turner RS, 
Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall G, Yesavage J, Taylor 
JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh MN, Belden CM, Jacobson SA, Sirrel 
SA, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, Obisesan TO, Wolday 
S, Allard J, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Tatsuoka C, Fatica P, Fletcher E, Maillard P, 
Olichney J, DeCarli C, Carmichael O, Kittur S, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, 
Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, Tariot P, Burke 
A, Milliken AM, Trncic N, Fleisher A, Reeder S, Bates V, Capote H, Rainka M, 
Scharre DW, Kataki M, Kelley B, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, Brown AD, Pearlson GD, 
Blank K, Anderson K, Flashman LA, Seltzer M, Hynes ML, Santulli RB, Sink KM, 
Leslie G, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Tremont G, Daiello LA, 
Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Perry D, Mintzer J, Spicer 
K, Bachman D, Finger E, Pasternak S, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, Drost D, 
Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, Schultz SK, Smith KE, Koleva H, Nam KW, Shim H, 
Relkin N, Chiang G, Lin M, Ravdin L, Smith A, Raj BA, Fargher K, Weiner MW, 
Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Green RC, Harvey D, Jack CR Jr, Jagust 
W, Morris JC, Saykin AJ, Shaw LM, Toga AW, Trojanowki JQ, Neylan T, Grafman J, 
Green RC, Montine T, Weiner M, Petersen R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Devon 
G, Sather T, Melissa D, Morrison R, Jiminez G, Neylan T, Jacqueline H, Shannon 
F, Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, 
Kejal K, Chad W, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Landau S, 
Morris JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, 
Figurski M, Toga AW, Karen C, Scott N, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, 
Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Karl F, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Mauricio B, 
Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Fleischman D, Arfanakis K, 
Shah RC, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Doraiswamy PM, Petrella JR, James O, 
Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein B, Martin KS, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, Mintzer 
J, Massoglia D, Brawman-Mintzer O, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Jagust W, 
Landau S, Rosen H, Perry D, Turner RS, Behan K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson 
KA, Marshall G, Sabbagh MN, Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Obisesan TO, Wolday S, 
Allard J, Johnson SC, Fruehling JJ, Harding S, Peskind ER, Petrie EC, Li G, 
Yesavage JA, Taylor JL, Furst AJ, Chao S, Relkin N, Chiang G, Ravdin L, Ravdin 
L.

Author information:
(1)Author Affiliations: UC San Francisco; University of Southern California; UC 
San Francisco University of Southern California Mayo Clinic, Rochester Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester; UC Berkeley; U Pennsylvania; USC; UC Davis; Brigham and 
Women's Hospital/Harvard Medical School Indiana University Washington University 
St. Louis University of Pennsylvania; Prevent Alzheimer's Disease 2020 (Chair) 
Siemens; Alzheimer's Association University of Pittsburgh Washington University 
St. Louis Cornell University; Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva 
University; AD Drug Discovery Foundation; Acumen Pharmaceuticals; Washington 
University St. Louis; Northwestern University; National Institute of Mental 
Health; Brown University; Eli Lilly (Chair); BWH/HMS (Chair); University of 
Washington (Chair); Mayo Clinic, Rochester (Core PI) University of Southern 
California; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San 
Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC Davis (Core 
PI); UC Davis; UC San Diego; Mayo Clinic, Rochester (Core PI); Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester; University of London; UCLA School of Medicine; UCSF MRI; UC Davis; 
Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; 
Mayo Clinic; UC Berkeley (Core PI); University of Michigan; University of Utah; 
Banner Alzheimer's Institute; Banner Alzheimer's Institute; University of 
Pittsburgh; UC Berkeley; Washington University St. Louis; Washington University 
St. Louis; Washington University St. Louis; Washington University St. Louis; 
UPenn School of Medicine; UPenn School of Medicine; UPenn School of Medicine; 
UPenn School of Medicine; UPenn School of Medicine; USC (Core PI); USC; USC; 
Indiana University; Indiana University; UC Irvine; Indiana University; Indiana 
University; Indiana University; Indiana University; UC San Francisco; UC San 
Diego; Prevent Alzheimer's Disease 2020; UC San Diego; National Institute on 
Aging; UC San Francisco; Brown University; National Institute of Mental Health; 
Cornell University; Johns Hopkins University; Richard Frank Consulting; Prevent 
Alzheimer's Disease 2020; National Institute on Aging; Oregon Health & Science 
University; University of Southern California; University of California - San 
Diego; University of Michigan; Mayo Clinic, Rochester; Baylor College of 
Medicine; Columbia University Medical Center; Washington University, St. Louis; 
University of Alabama - Birmingham; Mount Sinai School of Medicine; Rush 
University Medical Center; Wien Center; Johns Hopkins University; New York 
University; Duke University Medical Center; University of Pennsylvania; 
University of Kentucky; University of Pittsburgh; University of Rochester 
Medical Center; University of California, Irvine; University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical School; Emory University; University of Kansas, Medical 
Center; University of California, Los Angeles; Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville; 
Indiana University; Yale University School of Medicine; McGill Univ., 
Montreal-Jewish General Hospital; Sunnybrook Health Sciences, Ontario; U.B.C. 
Clinic for AD & Related Disorders; Cognitive Neurology - St. Joseph's, Ontario; 
Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health; Northwestern University; 
Premiere Research Inst (Palm Beach Neurology); Georgetown University Medical 
Center; Brigham and Women's Hospital; Stanford University; Banner Sun Health 
Research Institute; Boston University; Howard University; Case Western Reserve 
University; University of California, Davis - Sacramento; Neurological Care of 
CNY; Parkwood Hospital; University of Wisconsin; University of California, 
Irvine - BIC; Banner Alzheimer's Institute; Dent Neurologic Institute; Ohio 
State University; Albany Medical College; Hartford Hospital, Olin 
Neuropsychiatry Research Center; Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center; Wake Forest 
University Health Sciences; Rhode Island Hospital; Butler Hospital; UC San 
Francisco; Medical University South Carolina; St. Joseph's Health Care; Nathan 
Kline Institute; University of Iowa College of Medicine; Cornell University; 
University of South Florida: USF Health Byrd Alzheimer's Institute; University 
of California, San Francisco; University of Southern California; UC San 
Francisco; University of Southern California; Mayo Clinic, Rochester; Brigham 
and Women's Hospital/ Harvard Medical School; UC Davis; Mayo Clinic, Rochester; 
UC Berkeley; Washington University St. Louis; Indiana University; Perelman 
School of Medicine, UPenn; USC; Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania; UC San Francisco; Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Northwestern University; BWH/HMS (Chair); University of 
Washington (Chair); Core PI; Mayo Clinic, Rochester (Core PI); University of 
Southern California; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC 
San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Francisco; UC San Francisco; UC 
San Francisco; UC Davis (Core PI); UC San Diego; Mayo Clinic, Rochester (Core 
PI); Mayo Clinic, Rochester; Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; 
Mayo Clinic; UC Berkeley (Core PI); University of Michigan; University of Utah; 
Banner Alzheimer's Institute; Banner Alzheimer's Institute; UC Berkeley; 
Washington University St. Louis; Washington University St. Louis; Washington 
University St. Louis; Perelman School of Medicine, UPenn; Perelman School of 
Medicine, UPenn; Perelman School of Medicine, UPenn; Perelman School of 
Medicine, UPenn; Perelman School of Medicine, UPenn; USC (Core PI); USC; USC; 
Indiana University; Indiana University; UC Irvine; Indiana University; Indiana 
University; Indiana University; Indiana University; UC San Francisco; Department 
of Defense (retired); University of Southern California; University of 
California, San Diego; Columbia University Medical Center; Rush University 
Medical Center; Wien Center; Duke University Medical Center; University of 
Rochester Medical Center; University of California, Irvine; Medical University 
South Carolina; Premiere Research Inst (Palm Beach Neurology); University of 
California, San Francisco; Georgetown University Medical Center; Brigham and 
Women's Hospital; Banner Sun Health Research Institute; Howard University; 
University of Wisconsin; University of Washington; Stanford University; Cornell 
University.

Background: Ongoing research is focusing on the identification of those 
individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) who are most likely to convert 
to Alzheimer's disease (AD). We investigated whether recognition memory tasks in 
combination with delayed recall measure of episodic memory and CSF biomarkers 
can predict MCI to AD conversion at 24-month follow-up. Methods: A total of 397 
amnestic-MCI subjects from Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative were 
included. Logistic regression modeling was done to assess the predictive value 
of all RAVLT measures, risk factors such as age, sex, education, APOE genotype, 
and CSF biomarkers for progression to AD. Estimating adjusted odds ratios was 
used to determine which variables would produce an optimal predictive model, and 
whether adding tests of interaction between the RAVLT Delayed Recall and 
recognition measures (traditional score and d-prime) would improve prediction of 
the conversion from a-MCI to AD. Results: 112 (28.2%) subjects developed 
dementia and 285 (71.8%) subjects did not. Of the all included variables, CSF 
Aβ1-42 levels, RAVLT Delayed Recall, and the combination of RAVLT Delayed Recall 
and d-prime were predictive of progression to AD (χ2 = 38.23, df = 14, p < 
0.001). Conclusions: The combination of RAVLT Delayed Recall and d-prime 
measures may be predictor of conversion from MCI to AD in the ADNI cohort, 
especially in combination with amyloid biomarkers. A predictive model to help 
identify individuals at-risk for dementia should include not only traditional 
episodic memory measures (delayed recall or recognition), but also additional 
variables (d-prime) that allow the homogenization of the assessment procedures 
in the diagnosis of MCI.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00046
PMCID: PMC5344912
PMID: 28344552


288. BMC Geriatr. 2015 Sep 7;15:107. doi: 10.1186/s12877-015-0103-3.

Relationship between the Montreal Cognitive Assessment and Mini-mental State 
Examination for assessment of mild cognitive impairment in older adults.

Trzepacz PT(1), Hochstetler H(2), Wang S(3), Walker B(4), Saykin AJ(5); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Shaw 
LM, Khachaturian Z, Sorensen G, Carrillo M, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies 
P, Fillit H, Hefti F, Holtzman D, Mesulam M, Potter W, Snyder P, Schwartz A, 
Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, San, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, 
Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, Balasubramanian AB, Mason J, Sim I, Beckett L, 
Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, 
DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Vemuri P, Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward 
C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Morris 
JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Taylor-Reinwald L, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, 
Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin 
S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Thal L, Khachaturian Z, Thal L, 
Buckholtz N, Weiner MW, Snyder PJ, Potter W, Paul S, Albert M, Frank R, 
Consulting RF, Khachaturian Z, Hsiao J, Kaye J, Quinn J, Silbert L, Lind B, 
Carter R, Dolen S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Teodoro L, Spann BM, 
Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Fleisher A, Heidebrink JL, Lord JL, Petersen R, Mason 
SS, Albers CS, Knopman D, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Chowdhury M, 
Rountree S, Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Ances B, Morris JC, Carroll M, 
Creech ML, Franklin E, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Oliver A, Marson D, Griffith R, 
Clark D, Geldmacher D, Brockington J, Roberson E, Love MN, Grossman H, Mitsis E, 
Shah RC, deToledo-Morrell L, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Roberts P, Albert M, 
Onyike C, D'Agostino D 2nd, Kielb S, Galvin JE, Cerbone B, Michel CA, Pogorelec 
DM, Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, Glodzik L, De Santi S, Doraiswamy P, Petrella JR, 
Borges-Neto S, Wong TZ, Coleman E, Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk D, Clark CM, 
Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, Sinha P, Oates E, Conrad G, Lopez OL, Oakley M, 
Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein BS, Martin K, Makino KM, Ismail M, Brand 
C, Mulnard RA, Thai G, Mc-Adams-Ortiz C, Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Levey 
AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Swerdlow RH, Brooks WM, Apostolova L, Tingus K, 
Woo E, Silverman DH, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Kendall T, 
Johnson H, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews BR, Brosch JR, Herring S, Hunt C, van 
Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Varma P, Chertkow H, Bergman H, Hosein C, Black 
S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GY, Feldman H, Mudge B, Assaly M, Finger E, 
Pasternack S, Rachisky I, Trost D, Kertesz A, Bernick C, Munic D, Mesulam MM, 
Lipowski K, Weintraub S, Bonakdarpour B, Kerwin D, Wu CK, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, 
Villena T, Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall 
G, Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh MN, Belden CM, 
Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, 
Obisesan TO, Wolday S, Allard J, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Tatsuoka C, Fatica P, 
Fletcher E, Maillard P, Olichney J, DeCarli C, Carmichael O, Kittur S, Borrie M, 
Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen 
D, Tariot P, Burke A, Trncic N, Fleisher A, Reeder S, Bates V, Capote H, Rainka 
M, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Adeli A, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, Brown AD, 
Neuropsychiatry O, Pearlson GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Flashman LA, Seltzer M, 
Hynes ML, Santulli RB, Sink KM, Gordineer L, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, 
Ott BR, Querfurth H, Tremont G, Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, 
Miller BL, Perry D, Mintzer J, Spicer K, Bachman D, Finger E, Pasternak S, 
Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, Drost D, Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, 
Schultz SK, Ponto LL, Shim H, Smith KE, Relkin N, Chaing G, Lin M, Ravdin L, 
Smith A, Raj BA, Fargher K, Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, 
Green RC, Harvey D, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Morris JC, Saykin AJ, Shaw LM, Toga 
AW, Trojanowki JQ, Neylan T, Grafman J, Green RC, Montine T, Weiner M, Petersen 
R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Gessert D, Sather T, Davis M, Morrison R, 
Jiminez G, Neylan T, Hayes J, Finley S, Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, 
Bernstein M, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Kantarci K, Ward C, Jagust W, 
Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Landau S, Morris JC, Cairns NJ, 
Householder E, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga AW, 
Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, Nho 
K, Weiner MW, Friedl K, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Brewer J, 
Vanderswag H, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Fleischman D, Arfanakis K, Shah RC, 
Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Doraiswamy P, Petrella JR, James O, Porsteinsson AP, 
Goldstein B, Martin KS, Mulnard RA, Thai G, McAdams-Ortiz C, Mintzer J, 
Massoglia D, Brawman-Mintzer O, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Jagust W, 
Landau S, Rosen H, Perry D, Turner RS, Behan K, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, 
Marshall G, Sabbagh MN, Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Obisesan TO, Allard J, Johnson 
SC, Fruehling J, Harding S, Peskind ER, Petrie EC, Li G, Yesavage JA, Taylor JL, 
Furst AJ, Chao S, Relkin N, Chaing G, Ravdin L.

Author information:
(1)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. 
pttrzepacz@outlook.com.
(2)Eli Lilly and Company or one of its subsidiaries, Lilly Corporate Center, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA. hochstetler_helen_m@lilly.com.
(3)Eli Lilly and Company or one of its subsidiaries, Lilly Corporate Center, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA. wang_shufang@lilly.com.
(4)University College of London, Gower Street, London, UK. 
brett.walker.14@ucl.ac.uk.
(5)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. 
asaykin@iupui.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) was developed to enable 
earlier detection of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) relative to familiar 
multi-domain tests like the Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE). Clinicians need to 
better understand the relationship between MoCA and MMSE scores.
METHODS: For this cross-sectional study, we analyzed 219 healthy control (HC), 
299 MCI, and 100 Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia cases from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)-GO/2 database to evaluate MMSE and MoCA 
score distributions and select MoCA values to capture early and late MCI cases. 
Stepwise variable selection in logistic regression evaluated relative value of 
four test domains for separating MCI from HC. Functional Activities 
Questionnaire (FAQ) was evaluated as a strategy to separate dementia from MCI. 
Equi-percentile equating produced a translation grid for MoCA against MMSE 
scores. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analyses evaluated lower cutoff 
scores for capturing the most MCI cases.
RESULTS: Most dementia cases scored abnormally, while MCI and HC score 
distributions overlapped on each test. Most MCI cases scored ≥ 17 on MoCA 
(96.3%) and ≥ 24 on MMSE (98.3%). The ceiling effect (28-30 points) for MCI and 
HC was less using MoCA (18.1%) versus MMSE (71.4%). MoCA and MMSE scores 
correlated most for dementia (r = 0.86; versus MCI r = 0.60; HC r = 0.43). 
Equi-percentile equating showed a MoCA score of 18 was equivalent to MMSE of 24. 
ROC analysis found MoCA ≥ 17 as the cutoff between MCI and dementia that 
emphasized high sensitivity (92.3%) to capture MCI cases. The core and 
orientation domains in both tests best distinguished HC from MCI groups, whereas 
comprehension/executive function and attention/calculation were not helpful. 
Mean FAQ scores were significantly higher and a greater proportion had abnormal 
FAQ scores in dementia than MCI and HC.
CONCLUSIONS: MoCA and MMSE were more similar for dementia cases, but MoCA 
distributes MCI cases across a broader score range with less ceiling effect. A 
cutoff of ≥ 17 on the MoCA may help capture early and late MCI cases; depending 
on the level of sensitivity desired, ≥ 18 or 19 could be used. Functional 
assessment can help exclude dementia cases. MoCA scores are translatable to the 
MMSE to facilitate comparison.

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-015-0103-3
PMCID: PMC4562190
PMID: 26346644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2019 Aug 7;5:364-373. doi: 10.1016/j.trci.2019.06.004. 
eCollection 2019.

Identification of prognostic factors to predict cognitive decline of patients 
with early Alzheimer's disease in the Japanese Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative study.

Yagi T(1), Kanekiyo M(2), Ito J(3), Ihara R(4), Suzuki K(4), Iwata A(5), 
Iwatsubo T(6), Aoshima K(1); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; 
Japanese Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Eisai Co., Ltd., Koishikawa, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Eisai Inc., Woodcliff Lake, NJ, USA.
(3)Eisai Co., Ltd., Tokodai, Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki, Japan.
(4)Unit for Early and Exploratory Clinical Development, The University of Tokyo 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Neurology, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Neuropathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: The objective of this study was to determine the factors including 
neuropsychological test performances and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers 
which can predict disease progression of early Alzheimer's disease (AD) in a 
Japanese population.
METHODS: The group classification on early AD population in both Japanese 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (J-ADNI) and North American ADNI 
(NA-ADNI) was performed using the inclusion criteria including brain amyloid 
positivity on positron emission tomography or CSF. Participants with early AD 
from each cohort were stratified into two groups based on a cutoff 1.0 of 
Clinical Dementia Rating Scale Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) change at month 24 (m24): 
participants in "progress group" have CDR-SB change ≥ 1.0 and participants in 
"stable group" have CDR-SB change < 1.0. Then, we performed identification of 
prognostic factors from baseline items including neuropsychological scores 
(Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale[ADAS-cog 13], Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE), CDR, FAQ, and Geriatric Depression Scale ), CSF markers (t-tau, p-tau, 
and beta-amyloid 1-42), vital signs (body weight, pulse rate, etc.,), by using 
two statistical approaches, Welch's t-test and simple linear regression by 
ordinary least squares. Comparisons between participants with J-ADNI and 
participants with NA-ADNI were also performed.
RESULTS: Trends of CDR-SB changes were very similar between J-ADNI and NA-ADNI 
early AD population enrolled in this study. Baseline levels of CSF t-tau, p-tau, 
Mini-Mental State Examination, FAQ, and ADAS-cog13 were identified as prognostic 
factors in both J-ADNI and NA-ADNI. Based on a detailed subscale analysis on 
ADAS-cog13, four subscales (Q1: word recall, Q3: construction, Q4: delayed word 
recall, and Q8: word recognition) were identified as prognostic factors in both 
J-ADNI and NA-ADNI.
DISCUSSION: Characterizing population with early AD can provide benefits for 
promoting efficiency in conducting AD clinical trials for disease-modifying 
treatments. Thus, implementing these prognostic factors into clinical trials may 
be potentially a good method to enrich participants with early AD who are 
suitable for evaluating treatment effects.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trci.2019.06.004
PMCID: PMC6698925
PMID: 31440579


290. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2018 Jul-Sep;32(3):255-257. doi: 
10.1097/WAD.0000000000000226.

Biomarkers of Cognitive Impairment: Brain Cortical Thickness, Volumetrics, and 
Cerebrospinal Fluid.

Ghazi-Saidi L(1), Walsh RR(2), Shan G(3)(4), Banks SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Communication Disorders, College of Education, University of 
Nebraska at Kearney, Kearney, NE.
(2)Muhammad Ali Parkinson Center, Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, AZ.
(3)School of Community Health Sciences, University of Nevada Las Vegas.
(4)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Las Vegas, NV.

In Alzheimer’s disease (AD), association of cognition with disease biomarkers is 
important for accurate diagnosis, prognosis and staging. We studied the value of 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), cortical thickness (CT), and volume (V) measures (in 
isolation & combination) to predict cognitive ability, as well as cognitive 
status, in a cross-sectional study of data from Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI). Cognitive status was measured by Mini Mental State Exam 
(MMSE). Results show that combining biomarkers allows more accurate AD 
diagnosis. Specifically, combining CSF, CT, and V measures seems promising. In 
isolation, CSF levels show significant but weak associations with MMSE. Aβ 1– 42 
is associated with Mild Cognitive Impairment. CT and V measures of hippocampus 
and entorhinal cortex are strongly associated with Alzheimer ‘s Disease 
diagnosis and with ruling out the disease.

DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0000000000000226
PMCID: PMC5957760
PMID: 29189303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Alzheimers Dis. 2019;69(2):551-559. doi: 10.3233/JAD-190067.

Erlangen Score Predicts Cognitive and Neuroimaging Progression in Mild Cognitive 
Impairment Stage of Alzheimer's Disease.

Skillbäck T(1), Kornhuber J(2), Blennow K(1)(3), Zetterberg H(1)(3)(4)(5), 
Lewczuk P(2)(6); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
and Friedrich-Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(3)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, 
Sweden.
(4)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London WC1, 
N 3BG, UK.
(5)UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, London WC1, N 3BG, UK.
(6)Department of Neurodegeneration Diagnostics, Medical University of Bialystok, 
Poland.

BACKGROUND: To alleviate the interpretation of the core Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers, amyloid β1-42 (Aβ42), total tau (T-tau), 
and phosphorylated tau (P-tau), the Erlangen Score (ES) interpretation algorithm 
has been proposed.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we aim to assess the predictive properties of the ES 
algorithm on cognitive and neuroimaging outcomes in mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI).
METHODS: All MCI subjects with an available baseline CSF sample from ADNI-1 were 
included (n = 193), and assigned an ES between 0 and 4 based on their baseline 
CSF biomarker profile. Structural magnetic resonance imaging brain scans and 
MMSE and ADAS-Cog scores were collected at up to 7 times in follow-up 
examinations.
RESULTS: We observed strong and significant correlations between the ES at 
baseline and neuroimaging and cognitive results with patients with 
neurochemically probable AD (ES = 4) progressing significantly (p≤0.01) faster 
than those with a neurochemically improbable AD (ES = 0 or 1), and the subjects 
with neurochemically possible AD (ES = 2 or 3) in-between these two groups.
CONCLUSION: This study further demonstrates the utility of the ES algorithm as a 
as a tool in predicting cognitive and imaging progression in MCI patients.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-190067
PMID: 31104027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Front Aging Neurosci. 2020 Mar 12;12:38. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2020.00038. 
eCollection 2020.

Association of Plasma Transferrin With Cognitive Decline in Patients With Mild 
Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer's Disease.

Guan J(1), Wang P(2), Lu L(3), Zhao G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Lishui City People's Hospital, Lishui, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Lishui City People's Hospital, Lishui, 
China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Lishui City People's Hospital, Lishui, China.
(4)Department of General Surgery, Lishui City People's Hospital, Lishui, China.

Objective: The objective of this study was to examine whether plasma transferrin 
levels are associated with longitudinal changes in cognitive performance in 
older individuals with normal cognition (CN), mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 
and mild Alzheimer's disease (AD). Methods: At baseline, there were a total of 
358 participants from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
cohort, including 58 older individuals with CN, 198 older individuals with MCI, 
and 102 patients with AD. Linear mixed models were utilized to examine the 
associations of plasma transferrin levels with changes in cognitive performance 
over time after adjustment of several potential covariates. The Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE) and the Clinical Dementia Rating Scale Sum of Boxes 
(CDR-SB) were used to examine the global cognition of participants. Results: 
First, no significant differences in the plasma transferrin levels were observed 
across three diagnostic groups. Second, in the cross-sectional analyses, the 
baseline plasma transferrin levels were negatively associated with the MMSE 
scores in the CN group, but not in the MCI or the AD group. Third, in the 
longitudinal analyses, we found that a higher plasma transferrin was associated 
with a steeper cognitive decline in the MCI and AD groups, but not in the CN 
group. Conclusion: Higher plasma transferrin levels were associated with a 
steeper cognitive decline in participants with MCI and AD.

Copyright © 2020 Guan, Wang, Lu and Zhao.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2020.00038
PMCID: PMC7080847
PMID: 32226377


293. Drugs Aging. 2014 Feb;31(2):125-9. doi: 10.1007/s40266-013-0143-3.

Medication for Alzheimer's disease and associated fall hazard: a retrospective 
cohort study from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Epstein NU(1), Guo R, Farlow MR, Singh JP, Fisher M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hines VA Medical Center, 5000 South 5th Avenue, 
Hines, IL, 60141, USA, nue2you@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Falls are common in the elderly, especially in those with cognitive 
impairment. The elderly are often treated with several medications, which may 
have both beneficial and deleterious effects. The use and type of medication in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients and association with falls is limited.
OBJECTIVE: We examined the association between falls and medication use in the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).
METHODS: Diagnosis, demographics, medication use, apolipoprotein E4 allele 
status and functional activity level at baseline were gathered for 810 
participants enrolled in the ADNI, including healthy controls and subjects with 
mild cognitive impairment or Alzheimer's. Reports detailing adverse event falls 
were tabulated. Baseline characteristics were compared between subjects with and 
without one or more falls. Cox proportional hazards models were conducted to 
evaluate the association between subject characteristics and hazard of the first 
fall.
RESULTS: Age (p < 0.0001), Functional Activities Questionnaire (p = 0.035), 
Beers List (p = 0.0477) and medications for treating cognitive symptoms of 
Alzheimer's (p = 0.0019) were associated with hazard of fall in the univariate 
model. In the final multivariate model, after adjusting for covariates, 
Alzheimer's medication use (p = 0.0005) was associated with hazard of fall. 
Medication was changed by the clinician after an adverse fall event in 9% of the 
falls. About 7% of the falls were reported as serious adverse events and 6% were 
reported to be severe.
CONCLUSION: We found a significant association between the use of symptomatic 
medication treating cognitive symptoms in AD and hazard of fall after adjusting 
for age and Beers List medication use. Additional pharmacovigilance of the 
association between falls and Alzheimer's medication use is warranted.

DOI: 10.1007/s40266-013-0143-3
PMCID: PMC5469288
PMID: 24357133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Alzheimers Dis. 2016;49(2):387-98. doi: 10.3233/JAD-150181.

Associations between Neuropsychiatric Symptoms and Cerebral Amyloid Deposition 
in Cognitively Impaired Elderly People.

Bensamoun D(1), Guignard R(2), Furst AJ(3), Derreumaux A(1), Manera V(1), 
Darcourt J(4), Benoit M(5), Robert PH(1), David R(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre Memoire de Ressources et de Recherche, Institut Claude Pompidou, EA 
CoBTek, University of Nice Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Hôpital de La Tour, Meyrin, GE, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Department of Neurology and 
Neurological Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, USA; War Related Illness 
and Injury Study Center, VA Palo Alto, Palo Alto, USA.
(4)Nuclear Medicine Department, Antoine Lacassagne Center, Nice, France.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital of Nice, France.

BACKGROUND: Neuropsychiatric symptoms, also known as behavioral and 
psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD), affect the majority of patients with 
dementia, and result in a greater cognitive and functional impairment.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate associations between BPSD and amyloid cerebral 
deposition as measured by 18F-Florbetapir-PET quantitative uptake in elderly 
subjects with and without cognitive impairment.
METHODS: Participants with cognitive impairment [mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
or Alzheimer's disease (AD)] and healthy controls (HC) from the ADNI cohort 
(Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative) who underwent an 18F-florbetapir PET 
scan between May 2010 and March 2014 were included. Clinical assessments 
included the Clinical Dementia Rating, the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), 
and the Neuropsychiatric Inventory. Freesurfer software was used to extract PET 
counts based on T1-based structural ROI (frontal, cingulate, parietal, and 
temporal). Spearman's partial correlation scores between BPSD severity and 
regional amyloid uptake were calculated.
RESULTS: Data for 657 participants [age = 72.6 (7.19); MMSE = 27.4 (2.67)] were 
analyzed, including 230 HC [age = 73.1 (6.02); MMSE = 29 (1.21)], 308 MCI 
[age = 71.5 (7.44); MMSE = 28.0 (1.75)], and 119 AD subjects [age = 74.7 (8.05); 
MMSE = 23.1 (2.08)]. Considering all diagnostic groups together, positive 
significant correlations were found between anxiety and 18F-florbetapir uptake 
in the frontal (r = 0.102; p = 0.009), cingulate (r = 0.083; p = 0.034), and 
global cerebral uptake (r = 0.099; p = 0.011); between irritability and frontal 
(r = 0.089; p = 0.023), cingulate (r = 0.085; p = 0.030), parietal (r = 0.087; 
p = 0.025), and global cerebral uptake (r = 0.093; p = 0.017); in the MCI 
subgroup, between anxiety and frontal (r = 0.126; p = 0.03) and global uptake 
(r = 0.14; p = 0.013); in the AD subgroup, between irritability and parietal 
uptake (r = 0.201; p = 0.03).
CONCLUSION: Anxiety and irritability are associated with greater amyloid 
deposition in the neurodegenerative process leading to AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-150181
PMID: 26484900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2018 Jul 12;4:765-774. doi: 10.1016/j.trci.2018.06.008. 
eCollection 2018.

Effects of sex, educational background, and chronic kidney disease grading on 
longitudinal cognitive and functional decline in patients in the Japanese 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative study.

Iwata A(1), Iwatsubo T(2), Ihara R(2), Suzuki K(2), Matsuyama Y(3), Tomita N(4), 
Arai H(4), Ishii K(5), Senda M(6), Ito K(7), Ikeuchi T(8), Kuwano R(8), Matsuda 
H(9); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; Japanese Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Unit for Early and Exploratory Clinical Development, The University of Tokyo 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, The University of 
Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Geriatrics & Gerontology, Division of Brain Science, Institute 
of Development, Aging and Cancer (IDAC), Tohoku University, Japan.
(5)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Institute of Biomedical Research and Innovation, Kobe, Japan.
(7)National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology, Obu, Japan.
(8)Niigata University, Niigata, Japan.
(9)National Center for Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: The objective of this study was to determine whether sex or 
education level affects the longitudinal rate of cognitive decline in Japanese 
patients in the Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative study with defined 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: We accessed the entire Japanese Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative data set of 537 individuals, among whom 234 had MCI and 149 had 
Alzheimer's disease. We classified participants into three categories of 
educational history: (1) low, 0 to 9 years; (2) moderate, 10 to 15 years; and 
(3) high ≥16 years. We examined the main effects and interactions of visit, sex, 
and educational achievement on scores for the Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of 
Boxes, Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale 13, Mini-Mental 
State Examination, and Functional Activities Questionnaire in a longitudinal 
manner.
RESULTS: Women with MCI had a significantly faster rate of decline than men over 
a 3-year period. Highly educated men showed a significantly slower rate of 
decline than the other groups. Sex differences in the rates of decline remained 
after stratification by amyloid or apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 status but were 
absent in Alzheimer's disease over a 2-year period. Subtle differences in 
chronic kidney disease grade affected the rate of decline. A higher Fazekas 
periventricular hyperintensity score was associated with a lower estimated 
glomerular filtration rate in women only.
DISCUSSION: In patients with MCI, sex and educational history significantly 
affected the rate of change in cognitive and clinical assessments. Furthermore, 
a subtle decline in chronic kidney disease grade was associated with a faster 
rate of decline regardless of amyloid pathology in women.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trci.2018.06.008
PMCID: PMC6324255
PMID: 30662934


296. PLoS One. 2014 May 30;9(5):e97608. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097608. 
eCollection 2014.

APOE ε4 is associated with disproportionate progressive hippocampal atrophy in 
AD.

Manning EN(1), Barnes J(1), Cash DM(2), Bartlett JW(3), Leung KK(2), Ourselin 
S(2), Fox NC; Alzheimer's Disease NeuroImaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Dementia Research Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Dementia Research Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom; 
Centre for Medical Image Computing, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Medical Statistics, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(7):e104482.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate whether APOE ε4 carriers have higher hippocampal 
atrophy rates than non-carriers in Alzheimer's disease (AD), mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) and controls, and if so, whether higher hippocampal atrophy 
rates are still observed after adjusting for concurrent whole-brain atrophy 
rates.
METHODS: MRI scans from all available visits in ADNI (148 AD, 307 MCI, 167 
controls) were used. MCI subjects were divided into "progressors" (MCI-P) if 
diagnosed with AD within 36 months or "stable" (MCI-S) if a diagnosis of MCI was 
maintained. A joint multi-level mixed-effect linear regression model was used to 
analyse the effect of ε4 carrier-status on hippocampal and whole-brain atrophy 
rates, adjusting for age, gender, MMSE and brain-to-intracranial volume ratio. 
The difference in hippocampal rates between ε4 carriers and non-carriers after 
adjustment for concurrent whole-brain atrophy rate was then calculated.
RESULTS: Mean adjusted hippocampal atrophy rates in ε4 carriers were 
significantly higher in AD, MCI-P and MCI-S (p≤0.011, all tests) compared with 
ε4 non-carriers. After adjustment for whole-brain atrophy rate, the difference 
in mean adjusted hippocampal atrophy rate between ε4 carriers and non-carriers 
was reduced but remained statistically significant in AD and MCI-P.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the APOE ε4 allele drives atrophy to the 
medial-temporal lobe region in AD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097608
PMCID: PMC4039513
PMID: 24878738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journal's policy and have the following conflicts: Professor Fox's research 
group has received payment for consultancy or for conducting studies from AVID, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Elan Pharmaceuticals, Eisai, Lilly Research Laboratories, 
GE Healthcare, IXICO, Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy, Johnson & Johnson, 
Janssen-Cilig, Lundbeck, Neurochem Inc, Novartis Pharma AG, Pfizer Inc, 
Sanofi-Aventis and Wyeth Pharmaceuticals. NCF receives no personal compensation 
for the activities mentioned above. This does not alter the authors' adherence 
to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


297. J Psychiatr Res. 2024 Mar;171:296-305. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2024.01.038. 
Epub 2024 Jan 23.

Longitudinal trajectory effects of different MCI subtypes on general cognitive 
and daily functions in a population-based cohort of older adults.

Yuan M(1), Long X(1), Zhang Z(1), Rong M(1), Lian S(1), Peng Y(2), Fang Y(3); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Health Technology Assessment of Fujian Province, School of 
Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China; Center for Aging and Health 
Research, School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(2)School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Health Technology Assessment of Fujian Province, School of 
Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China; Center for Aging and Health 
Research, School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. Electronic 
address: fangya@xmu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVES: To identify different mild cognitive impairment (MCI) phenotypes 
based on substantial relative impairment in specific cognitive domains and then 
characterize the complex process of general cognitive and daily functions over 
time in older adults with these MCI subtypes.
METHODS: A total of 1020 participants with MCI at baseline from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) were recruited. MCI subtypes were 
obtained based on neuropsychological tests in five cognitive domains: memory 
(M), visuospatial function (V), language (L), processing speed (P), and 
executive function (E). General cognitive function and daily function were 
measured by the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the Functional 
Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ), respectively. Linear mixed models were fitted to 
curve their trajectories across different MCI subtypes.
RESULTS: Considering visuospatial function, subtypes were MO (memory impaired 
only), M&V (memory and visuospatial function impaired) and M&nV (memory impaired 
and visuospatial function non-impaired). Similar subtypes and naming rules were 
obtained based on language, executive function, and processing speed. Further, 
depending on the number of relative impaired cognitive domains M&S and M&M were 
obtained. Participants with MO had the highest prevalence in the sample 
(53.4 %), followed by M&nV (31.1 %). Participants with M&V had the highest mean 
age (74.69 years) at baseline and the greatest dementia conversion rate 
(53.2 %). The MMSE and FAQ score trajectories changed most slowly in 
participants with MO while fastest in those with M&V. Obvious different 
trajectories of both MMSE and FAQ scores were observed across different subtypes 
based on visuospatial function and executive function.
CONCLUSION: Compared to MO, individuals with multi-dimensional cognitive 
impairment have worse general cognitive and daily functions, especially for 
those with M&V.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2024.01.038
PMID: 38335640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors 
declare that they have no conflicts of interest.


298. J Alzheimers Dis. 2019;68(1):405-414. doi: 10.3233/JAD-180971.

The Influence of BDNF Val66Met Polymorphism on Cognition, Cerebrospinal Fluid, 
and Neuroimaging Markers in Non-Demented Elderly.

Xia H(1), Wang M(2), Li JQ(1), Tan CC(1), Cao XP(3), Tan L(1), Yu JT(4); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
China.
(2)College of Nursing, Qingdao University, China.
(3)Clinical Research Center, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
China.
(4)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: The brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) Val66Met polymorphism 
emerged as a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, little was known 
about its effects on the process of potential AD.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of the Val66Met polymorphism on cognition, 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and neuroimaging markers in non-demented elderly 
individuals.
METHODS: A total of 1,081 adults without dementia (375 healthy subjects and 706 
individuals with mild cognitive impairment) were recruited from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) to test the influence of BDNF Val66Met 
polymorphism on cognitive impairment, brain structure atrophy, and change in the 
levels of CSF biomarkers. Moreover, we also conducted our study in abnormal 
amyloid-β (A+) subgroup and normal amyloid-β (A-) subgroup, as well as in APOEɛ4 
carriers and non-carriers.
RESULTS: The BDNF Val66Met polymorphism had significant association with atrophy 
of the entorhinal cortex and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores in the 
non-demented elderly and A + subgroup, while no association was found in 
A-subgroup. What is more, there was a significant effect of interaction between 
BDNF Val66Met and amyloid-β load in MMSE. In addition, significant associations 
of BDNF Val66Met with the entorhinal cortex and ventricular volumes were found 
among APOEɛ4 non-carriers, but not APOEɛ4 carriers.
CONCLUSIONS: The BDNF Val66Met polymorphism is associated with cognitive 
impairment and brain atrophy among the non-demented elderly, APOEɛ4 non-carriers 
and A + subgroup, implying the potential of the Val66Met polymorphism as an 
important genetic factor for AD-related neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-180971
PMID: 30775992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


299. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2010 Feb;31(2):347-54. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A1809. Epub 2010 
Jan 14.

Combining MR imaging, positron-emission tomography, and CSF biomarkers in the 
diagnosis and prognosis of Alzheimer disease.

Walhovd KB(1), Fjell AM, Brewer J, McEvoy LK, Fennema-Notestine C, Hagler DJ Jr, 
Jennings RG, Karow D, Dale AM; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, CSHC, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. 
k.b.walhovd@psykologi.uio.no

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Different biomarkers for AD may potentially be 
complementary in diagnosis and prognosis of AD. Our aim was to combine MR 
imaging, FDG-PET, and CSF biomarkers in the diagnostic classification and 2-year 
prognosis of MCI and AD, by examining the following: 1) which measures are most 
sensitive to diagnostic status, 2) to what extent the methods provide unique 
information in diagnostic classification, and 3) which measures are most 
predictive of clinical decline.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: ADNI baseline MR imaging, FDG-PET, and CSF data from 42 
controls, 73 patients with MCI, and 38 patients with AD; and 2-year clinical 
follow-up data for 36 controls, 51 patients with MCI, and 25 patients with AD 
were analyzed. The hippocampus and entorhinal, parahippocampal, retrosplenial, 
precuneus, inferior parietal, supramarginal, middle temporal, lateral, and 
medial orbitofrontal cortices were used as regions of interest. CSF variables 
included Abeta42, t-tau, p-tau, and ratios of t-tau/Abeta42 and p-tau/Abeta42. 
Regression analyses were performed to determine the sensitivity of measures to 
diagnostic status as well as 2-year change in CDR-SB, MMSE, and delayed logical 
memory in MCI.
RESULTS: Hippocampal volume, retrosplenial thickness, and t-tau/Abeta42 uniquely 
predicted diagnostic group. Change in CDR-SB was best predicted by retrosplenial 
thickness; MMSE, by retrosplenial metabolism and thickness; and delayed logical 
memory, by hippocampal volume.
CONCLUSIONS: All biomarkers were sensitive to the diagnostic group. Combining MR 
imaging morphometry and CSF biomarkers improved diagnostic classification 
(controls versus AD). MR imaging morphometry and PET were largely overlapping in 
value for discrimination. Baseline MR imaging and PET measures were more 
predictive of clinical change in MCI than were CSF measures.

DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A1809
PMCID: PMC2821467
PMID: 20075088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Neurology. 2017 May 2;88(18):1751-1758. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003907. Epub 
2017 Apr 5.

Randomized controlled trials in mild cognitive impairment: Sources of 
variability.

Petersen RC(1), Thomas RG(2), Aisen PS(2), Mohs RC(2), Carrillo MC(2), Albert 
MS(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and Foundation for NIH 
(FNIH) Biomarkers Consortium AD MCI Placebo Data Analysis Project Team.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (R.C.P.), Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, MN; Department of Neurosciences (R.G.T.), University of California, 
San Diego, La Jolla; University of Southern California (P.S.A.), Los Angeles; 
Eli Lilly and Company (R.C.M.), Indianapolis, IN; Division of Medical & 
Scientific Relations (M.C.C.), Alzheimer's Association, Chicago, IL; and Johns 
Hopkins School of Medicine (M.S.A.), Baltimore, MD. R.C.M. is currently with 
Global Alzheimer's Platform Foundation, Washington, DC. peter8@mayo.edu.
(2)From the Department of Neurology (R.C.P.), Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, MN; Department of Neurosciences (R.G.T.), University of California, 
San Diego, La Jolla; University of Southern California (P.S.A.), Los Angeles; 
Eli Lilly and Company (R.C.M.), Indianapolis, IN; Division of Medical & 
Scientific Relations (M.C.C.), Alzheimer's Association, Chicago, IL; and Johns 
Hopkins School of Medicine (M.S.A.), Baltimore, MD. R.C.M. is currently with 
Global Alzheimer's Platform Foundation, Washington, DC.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2017 May 2;88(18):1757. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003893.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the variability in performance among placebo groups in 
randomized controlled trials for mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: Placebo group data were obtained from 2 National Institute on Aging 
(NIA) MCI randomized controlled trials, the Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative 
Study (ADCS) MCI trial and the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI), which is a simulated clinical trial, in addition to industry-sponsored 
clinical trials involving rivastigmine, galantamine, rofecoxib, and donepezil. 
The data were collated for common measurement instruments. The performance of 
the placebo participants from these studies was tracked on the Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale, Mini-Mental State Examination, and 
Clinical Dementia Rating-sum of boxes, and for progression on these measures to 
prespecified clinical study endpoints. APOE status, where available, was also 
analyzed for its effects.
RESULTS: The progression to clinical endpoints varied a great deal among the 
trials. The expected performances were seen for the participants in the 2 NIA 
trials, ADCS and ADNI, with generally worsening of performance over time; 
however, the industry-sponsored trials largely showed stable or improved 
performance in their placebo participants. APOE4 carrier status influenced 
results in an expected fashion on the study outcomes, including rates of 
progression and cognitive subscales.
CONCLUSIONS: In spite of apparently similar criteria for MCI being adopted by 
the 7 studies, the implementation of the criteria varied a great deal. Several 
explanations including instruments used to characterize participants and 
variability among study populations contributed to the findings.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003907
PMCID: PMC5409843
PMID: 28381516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2013 Sep;40(9):1394-405. doi: 
10.1007/s00259-013-2458-z. Epub 2013 May 29.

Automated analysis of FDG PET as a tool for single-subject probabilistic 
prediction and detection of Alzheimer's disease dementia.

Arbizu J(1), Prieto E, Martínez-Lage P, Martí-Climent JM, García-Granero M, 
Lamet I, Pastor P, Riverol M, Gómez-Isla MT, Peñuelas I, Richter JA, Weiner MW; 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, 
Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Shaw LM, 
Khachaturian Z, Sorensen G, Carrillo M, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies P, 
Fillit H, Hefti F, Holtzman D, Mesulam M, Potter W, Snyder P, Schwartz A, 
Montine T, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, 
Beckett L, Harvey D, Donohue M, Bernstein M, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, 
DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Vemuri P, Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward 
C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Morris 
JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Taylor-Reinwald L, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka 
M, Figurski M, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, Faber 
K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Thal L, Khachaturian Z, Thal L, Buckholtz N, Snyder 
PJ, Potter W, Paul S, Albert M, Frank R, Hsiao J, Kaye J, Quinn J, Lind B, 
Carter R, Dolen S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Teodoro L, Spann BM, 
Brewer J, Vanderswag H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, Avenida Pio 
XII 36, 31008 Pamplona, Spain. jarbizu@unav.es

PURPOSE: To introduce, evaluate and validate a voxel-based analysis method of 
¹⁸F-FDG PET imaging for determining the probability of Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
in a particular individual.
METHODS: The subject groups for model derivation comprised 80 healthy subjects 
(HS), 36 patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) who converted to AD 
dementia within 18 months, 85 non-converter MCI patients who did not convert 
within 24 months, and 67 AD dementia patients with baseline FDG PET scan were 
recruited from the AD Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. Additionally, 
baseline FDG PET scans from 20 HS, 27 MCI and 21 AD dementia patients from our 
institutional cohort were included for model validation. The analysis technique 
was designed on the basis of the AD-related hypometabolic convergence index 
adapted for our laboratory-specific context (AD-PET index), and combined in a 
multivariable model with age and gender for AD dementia detection (AD score). A 
logistic regression analysis of different cortical PET indexes and clinical 
variables was applied to search for relevant predictive factors to include in 
the multivariable model for the prediction of MCI conversion to AD dementia 
(AD-Conv score). The resultant scores were stratified into sixtiles for 
probabilistic diagnosis.
RESULTS: The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) for 
the AD score detecting AD dementia in the ADNI database was 0.879, and the 
observed probability of AD dementia in the six defined groups ranged from 8% to 
100% in a monotonic trend. For predicting MCI conversion to AD dementia, only 
the posterior cingulate index, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score and 
apolipoprotein E4 genotype (ApoE4) exhibited significant independent effects in 
the univariable and multivariable models. When only the latter two clinical 
variables were included in the model, the AUC was 0.742 (95% CI 0.646 - 0.838), 
but this increased to 0.804 (95% CI 0.714 - 0.894, bootstrap p=0.027) with the 
addition of the posterior cingulate index (AD-Conv score). Baseline clinical 
diagnosis of MCI showed 29.7% of converters after 18 months. The observed 
probability of conversion in relation to baseline AD-Conv score was 75% in the 
high probability group (sixtile 6), 34% in the medium probability group (merged 
sixtiles 4 and 5), 20% in the low probability group (sixtile 3) and 7.5% in the 
very low probability group (merged sixtiles 1 and 2). In the validation 
population, the AD score reached an AUC of 0.948 (95% CI 0.625 - 0.969) and the 
AD-Conv score reached 0.968 (95% CI 0.908 - 1.000), with AD patients and MCI 
converters included in the highest probability categories.
CONCLUSION: Posterior cingulate hypometabolism, when combined in a multivariable 
model with age and gender as well as MMSE score and ApoE4 data, improved the 
determination of the likelihood of patients with MCI converting to AD dementia 
compared with clinical variables alone. The probabilistic model described here 
provides a new tool that may aid in the clinical diagnosis of AD and MCI 
conversion.

DOI: 10.1007/s00259-013-2458-z
PMID: 23715905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Turk J Med Sci. 2024 Jan 5;54(4):688-699. doi: 10.55730/1300-0144.5838. 
eCollection 2024.

Can volumetric magnetic resonance imaging evaluations be helpful in the 
follow-up of cognitive functions in cognitively normal Parkinson's disease 
patients?

Uysal HA(1), Hünerli D(2), Çakmur R(3), Dönmez Çolakoğlu B(3), Ada E(4), Yener 
G(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, İzmir University of Economics, Medical Point 
Hospital, İzmir, Turkiye.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Institute of Health Sciences, Dokuz Eylül 
University, İzmir, Turkiye.
(3)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Dokuz Eylül University, İzmir, 
Turkiye.
(4)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, Dokuz Eylül University, İzmir, 
Turkiye.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, İzmir University of Economics, İzmir, Turkiye.
(6)İzmir Biomedicine and Genome Center, İzmir, Turkiye.

BACKGROUND/AIM: In this study, besides the evaluation of gray and white matter 
changes in cognitively normal Parkinson's disease (PD-CN) patients with 
volumetric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) parameters, it was tried to show 
that some neuropsychological tests may be impaired in PD-CN patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twenty-six PD-CN patients and 26 healthy elderly (HC) 
participants were included in the current study. Global cognitive status was 
assessed using the mini-mental state examination (MMSE), and the Montreal 
cognitive assessment scale (MoCA). Attention and executive functions were 
evaluated using the Wechsler memory scale-revised (WMS-R) digit span test and 
trail making test (TMT) part A and part B, the Stroop test, semantic and 
phonemic fluency tests, and clock drawing test. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
was acquired according to the Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative (ADNI) 
protocol.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences among groups regarding age, sex, 
handedness, and years of education. In the comparison of the PD-CN group and the 
HC group, there was a statistical decrease in the total animal scores, lexical 
fluency, TMT part A and TMT part B scores in the PD-CN group. Subcortical gray 
matter volumes (GMV) were significantly lower in PD-CN patients. The PD-CN group 
had a significantly reduced total volume of right putamen and left angular gyrus 
compared to that in the HC group. We observed that putamen and angular gyrus 
volumes were lower in PD-CN patients. On the other hand, TMT part B may be a 
useful pretest in detecting the conversion of mild cognitive impairment in PD.
CONCLUSION: Significant MRI volumetric measurements and neuropsychological test 
batteries can be helpful in the clinical follow-up in PD-CN patients.

© TÜBİTAK.

DOI: 10.55730/1300-0144.5838
PMCID: PMC11407370
PMID: 39295615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


303. Front Aging Neurosci. 2017 Jun 8;9:181. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00181. 
eCollection 2017.

Cerebral Blood Flow and Amyloid-β Interact to Affect Memory Performance in 
Cognitively Normal Older Adults.

Bangen KJ(1)(2), Clark AL(3), Edmonds EC(1)(2), Evangelista ND(1), Werhane 
ML(3), Thomas KR(1)(4), Locano LE(5), Tran M(5), Zlatar ZZ(2), Nation DA(6), 
Bondi MW(2)(4), Delano-Wood L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Service, VA San Diego Healthcare System, San DiegoCA, United States.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La JollaCA, 
United States.
(3)San Diego State University, University of California, San Diego Joint 
Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology, San DiegoCA, United States.
(4)Psychology Service, VA San Diego Healthcare System, San DiegoCA, United 
States.
(5)Department of Psychology, San Diego State University, San DiegoCA, United 
States.
(6)Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, Los AngelesCA, 
United States.

Cerebral blood flow (CBF) alterations and amyloid-β (Aβ) accumulation have been 
independently linked to cognitive deficits in older adults at risk for dementia. 
Less is known about how CBF and Aβ may interact to affect cognition in 
cognitively normal older adults. Therefore, we examined potential statistical 
interactions between CBF and Aβ status in regions typically affected in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) within a sample of older adults from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) study. Sixty-two cognitively normal 
participants (mean age = 72 years) underwent neuroimaging and memory testing. 
Arterial spin labeling magnetic resonance imaging was used to quantify CBF and 
florbetapir PET amyloid imaging was used to measure Aβ deposition. Aβ status 
(i.e., positivity versus negativity) was determined based on established cutoffs 
(Landau et al., 2013). The Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test was used to assess 
memory. Linear regression models adjusted for age, education, and sex, 
demonstrated significant interactions between CBF and Aβ status on memory 
performance. Among Aβ positive older adults, there were significant negative 
associations between higher CBF in hippocampus, posterior cingulate, and 
precuneus and poorer memory performance. In contrast, among Aβ negative older 
adults, there were no significant associations between CBF and cognition. Our 
findings extend previous CBF studies of dementia risk by reporting interactions 
between Aβ status and CBF on memory performance in a sample of 
well-characterized, cognitively normal older adults. Results suggest that 
differential CBF-cognition associations can be identified in healthy, 
asymptomatic Aβ positive older adults relative to Aβ negative individuals. 
Associations between higherCBF and poorer memory among Aβ positive older adults 
may reflect a cellular and/or vascular compensatory response to pathologic 
processes whereby higher CBF is needed to maintain normal memory abilities. 
Findings indicate that CBF and its associations with cognition may have utility 
as a reliable marker of brain function early in the AD process when 
interventions are likely to be beneficial.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00181
PMCID: PMC5463038
PMID: 28642699


304. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;44(1):79-92. doi: 10.3233/JAD-140942.

Generalizability of the disease state index prediction model for identifying 
patients progressing from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease.

Hall A(1), Muñoz-Ruiz M(2), Mattila J(3), Koikkalainen J(3), Tsolaki M(4), 
Mecocci P(5), Kloszewska I(6), Vellas B(7), Lovestone S(8), Visser PJ(9), 
Lötjonen J(3), Soininen H(2); Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; 
AddNeuroMed consortium; DESCRIPA and Kuopio L-MCI.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Neurology, University of Eastern Finland, 
Kuopio, Finland.
(2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Neurology, University of Eastern Finland, 
Kuopio, Finland Department of Neurology, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, 
Finland.
(3)VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Tampere, Finland.
(4)Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Memory and Dementia Centre, "G 
Papanicolaou" General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(5)Institute of Gerontology and Geriatrics, University of Perugia, Perugia, 
Italy.
(6)Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(7)UMR INSERM, University of Toulouse, France.
(8)National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), London, UK King's College 
London, Institute of Psychiatry, London, UK.
(9)VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands Maastricht 
University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The Disease State Index (DSI) prediction model measures the 
similarity of patient data to diagnosed stable and progressive mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) cases to identify patients who are progressing to Alzheimer's 
disease.
OBJECTIVES: We evaluated how well the DSI generalizes across four different 
cohorts: DESCRIPA, ADNI, AddNeuroMed, and the Kuopio MCI study.
METHODS: The accuracy of the DSI in predicting progression was examined for each 
cohort separately using 10 × 10-fold cross-validation and for inter-cohort 
validation using each cohort as a test set for the model built from the other 
independent cohorts using bootstrapping with 10 repetitions. Altogether 875 
subjects were included in the analysis. The analyzed data included a 
comprehensive set of age and gender corrected magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
features from hippocampal volumetry, multi-template tensor-based morphometry, 
and voxel-based morphometry as well as Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), 
APOE genotype, and additional cohort specific data from neuropsychological tests 
and cerebrospinal fluid measurements (CSF).
RESULTS: The DSI model was used to classify the patients into stable and 
progressive MCI cases. AddNeuroMed had the highest classification results of the 
cohorts, while ADNI and Kuopio MCI exhibited the lowest values. The MRI features 
alone achieved a good classification performance for all cohorts. For ADNI and 
DESCRIPA, adding MMSE, APOE genotype, CSF, and neuropsychological data improved 
the results.
CONCLUSIONS: The results reveal that the prediction performance of the combined 
cohort is close to the average of the individual cohorts. It is feasible to use 
different cohorts as training sets for the DSI, if they are sufficiently 
similar.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-140942
PMID: 25201784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Comput Math Methods Med. 2021 Jun 21;2021:5545297. doi: 10.1155/2021/5545297. 
eCollection 2021.

A Real-Time Clinical Decision Support System, for Mild Cognitive Impairment 
Detection, Based on a Hybrid Neural Architecture.

Suárez-Araujo CP(1), García Báez P(2), Cabrera-León Y(1), Prochazka A(3)(4), 
Rodríguez Espinosa N(5), Fernández Viadero C(6), Neuroimaging Initiative 
FTAD(7).

Author information:
(1)Instituto Universitario de Ciencias y Tecnologías Cibernéticas, Universidad 
de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Ingeniería Informática y de Sistemas, Universidad de La 
Laguna, La Laguna, Spain.
(3)Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical 
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Computing and Control Engineering, University of Chemistry and 
Technology, Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)Unidad de Neurología de la Conducta y Memoria, Hospital Universitario Nuestra 
Señora de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain.
(6)Servicio de Psiquiatría, Hospital Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla, 
Santander, Spain.
(7)Center for Imaging of Neurodegenerative Disease San Francisco VA Medical 
Center University of California, San Francisco, USA.

Clinical procedure for mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is mainly based on 
clinical records and short cognitive tests. However, low suspicion and 
difficulties in understanding test cut-offs make diagnostic accuracy being low, 
particularly in primary care. Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are suitable to 
design computed aided diagnostic systems because of their features of generating 
relationships between variables and their learning capability. The main aim 
pursued in that work is to explore the ability of a hybrid ANN-based system in 
order to provide a tool to assist in the clinical decision-making that 
facilitates a reliable MCI estimate. The model is designed to work with 
variables usually available in primary care, including Minimental Status 
Examination (MMSE), Functional Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ), Geriatric 
Depression Scale (GDS), age, and years of education. It will be useful in any 
clinical setting. Other important goal of our study is to compare the diagnostic 
rendering of ANN-based system and clinical physicians. A sample of 128 MCI 
subjects and 203 controls was selected from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI). The ANN-based system found the optimal variable combination, 
being AUC, sensitivity, specificity, and clinical utility index (CUI) 
calculated. The ANN results were compared with those from medical experts which 
include two family physicians, a neurologist, and a geriatrician. The optimal 
ANN model reached an AUC of 95.2%, with a sensitivity of 90.0% and a specificity 
of 84.78% and was based on MMSE, FAQ, and age inputs. As a whole, physician 
performance achieved a sensitivity of 46.66% and a specificity of 91.3%. CUIs 
were also better for the ANN model. The proposed ANN system reaches excellent 
diagnostic accuracy although it is based only on common clinical tests. These 
results suggest that the system is especially suitable for primary care 
implementation, aiding physicians work with cognitive impairment suspicions.

Copyright © 2021 Carmen Paz Suárez-Araujo et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/5545297
PMCID: PMC8257364
PMID: 34257699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest regarding the publication of this paper.


306. Front Neurol. 2019 Aug 20;10:900. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00900. eCollection 
2019.

Sex Moderates Amyloid and Apolipoprotein ε4 Effects on Default Mode Network 
Connectivity at Rest.

Caldwell JZK(1), Zhuang X(1), Leavitt MJ(1), Banks SJ(2), Cummings J(1)(3), 
Cordes D(1); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Las Vegas, NV, United 
States.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, 
CA, United States.
(3)UNLV School of Allied Health Sciences, Las Vegas, NV, United States.

Women are more likely to have Alzheimer's disease (AD) and decline more rapidly 
once diagnosed despite greater verbal memory early in the disease compared to 
men-an advantage that has been termed "memory reserve." Resting state functional 
MRI (fMRI) investigations demonstrate interactions between sex and AD risk 
factors in default mode network (DMN) connectivity, a network of brain regions 
showing progressive dysfunction in AD. Separate work suggests connectivity of 
left prefrontal cortex (PFC) may correlate with more general cognitive reserve 
in healthy aging. It is unknown whether left prefrontal functional connectivity 
with anterior and posterior default mode network (aDMN, pDMN) might differ by 
sex in AD. This study employed group independent component analysis (ICA) to 
analyze resting state fMRI data from 158 participants from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) with baseline diagnoses of normal 
cognition or early mild cognitive impairment (eMCI). pDMN and aDMN were defined 
on a subject-specific basis; prefrontal areas were selected from the Brodmann 
atlas (BA 6, 44, 8, and 9). Moderation regression analyses examined whether sex 
and amyloid PET positivity (A+/-) moderated effects of apolipoprotein ε4 (APOE 
ε4) on connectivity between left PFC, aDMN, and pDMN; and between aDMN and pDMN. 
Significant analyses were followed up with partial correlations assessing 
relationship of connectivity to verbal memory on the Rey Auditory Verbal 
Learning Test (RAVLT), and with preliminary analyses within NC and eMCI groups 
separately. Results showed no sex moderation of effects of A+ and APOE ε4 on 
left prefrontal/DMN connectivity in the full sample. However, sex significantly 
moderated impact of A+ and APOE ε4 on connectivity between aDMN and pDMN (p < 
0.01). Women with an APOE allele (ε4+) and A+ showed greater aDMN/pDMN 
connectivity than their ε4- counterparts. No significant results were observed 
in men. Subgroup analyses suggested the aDMN/pDMN finding was true for those 
with NC, not eMCI. Partial correlations controlling for age and education showed 
increased aDMN/pDMN connectivity related to better verbal learning in women (p < 
0.01) and not men (p = 0.18). In women at risk for AD or in early symptomatic 
stages who also have evidence of amyloid burden, stronger aDMN/pDMN connectivity 
may support verbal learning.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00900
PMCID: PMC6710397
PMID: 31481928


307. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2015 Jun;1(1):46-52. doi: 10.1016/j.trci.2015.03.001.

Using baseline cognitive severity for enriching Alzheimer's disease clinical 
trials: How does Mini-Mental State Examination predict rate of change?

Kennedy RE(1), Cutter GR(1), Wang G(1), Schneider LS(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Alabama, Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.
(2)University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, 
California.

BACKGROUND: Post hoc analyses from clinical trials in Alzheimer's disease 
suggest more cognitively impaired participants respond differently from less 
impaired on cognitive outcomes. We examined pooled clinical trials data to 
assess the utility of enriching trials using baseline cognition.
METHODS: We included 2,882 participants with mild to moderate AD in 7 studies 
from a meta-database. We used mixed effects models to estimate rate of decline 
in ADAS-cog scores among MMSE groups.
FINDINGS: Baseline MMSE category was associated with baseline scores and rate of 
decline on the ADAS-cog, adjusting for age and education (both p<0.001). Greater 
baseline cognitive impairment was associated with more rapid progression.
INTERPRETATIONS: Although we found significant differences in rate of decline, 
the majority of differences between individuals were from baseline ADAS-cog 
values. Enrichment based on MMSE would reduce the recruitment pool while adding 
only slightly to detecting differences in rate of progression and is not 
advised.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trci.2015.03.001
PMCID: PMC5040516
PMID: 27695707

Conflict of interest statement: statement [During the 36 month window before 
submission] Disclosures of all authors’ financial relationships deemed relevant 
to the manuscript: Dr. Lon S. Schneider reports being an editor on the Cochrane 
Collaboration Dementia and Cognitive Improvement Group, which oversees 
systematic reviews of drugs for cognitive impairment and dementia; receiving a 
grant from the Alzheimer’s Association for a registry for dementia and cognitive 
impairment trials; within the past 3 years receiving grant or research support 
from NIA, Baxter, Eli Lilly, Forum, Genentech, Lundbeck, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer 
and Tau Rx; and having served as a consultant for or receiving consulting fees 
from AC Immune, Allon, AstraZeneca, Avraham Pharmaceutical, Ltd, Baxter, Biogen 
Idec, Cerespir, Cytox, Elan, Eli Lilly, Forum, GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson & 
Johnson, Lundbeck, Merck, Pfizer, Roche, Servier, Takeda, Toyama, and Zinfandel. 
Dr. Richard E. Kennedy reports receiving grant support from NIA, NINDS, NHLBI, 
NIDDK, and the Department of Education. Mr. Guoqiao Wang reports receiving grant 
support from NIA. Dr. Gary R. Cutter reports receiving grant or research support 
from Participation of Data and Safety Monitoring Committees: All of the below 
organizations are focused on medical research: Apotek, Biogen-Idec, Cleveland 
Clinic, Glaxo Smith Klein Pharmaceuticals, Gilead Pharmaceuticals, 
Modigenetech/Prolor, Merck/Ono Pharmaceuticals, Merck, Neuren, Revalesio, 
Sanofi-Aventis, Teva, Vivus, NHLBI (Bone Marrow Transplant Protocol Review 
Committee), NINDS, NMSS, NICHD (OPRU oversight committee). Consulting, Speaking 
fees & Adviosry Boards: Alexion, Allozyne, Bayer, Celgene, Coronado Biosciences, 
Consortium of MS Centers (grant), Diogenix, Klein-Buendel Incorporated, 
Medimmune, Novartis, Nuron Biotech, Receptos, Spiniflex Pharmaceuticals, Teva 
pharmaceuticals. Dr. Cutter is employed by the University of Alabama at 
Birmingham and President of Pythagoras, Inc. a private consulting company 
located in Birmingham AL.


308. Neurobiol Aging. 2011 Dec;32(12):2322.e19-27. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.05.023. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

Prediction of MCI to AD conversion, via MRI, CSF biomarkers, and pattern 
classification.

Davatzikos C(1), Bhatt P, Shaw LM, Batmanghelich KN, Trojanowski JQ.

Author information:
(1)Section of Biomedical Image Analysis, Department of Radiology, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. christos@rad.upenn.edu

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) patterns were examined together with 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers in serial scans of Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) participants with mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI). The SPARE-AD score, summarizing brain atrophy patterns, was tested as a 
predictor of short-term conversion to Alzheimer's disease (AD). MCI individuals 
that converted to AD (MCI-C) had mostly positive baseline SPARE-AD (Spatial 
Pattern of Abnormalities for Recognition of Early AD) and atrophy in temporal 
lobe gray matter (GM) and white matter (WM), posterior cingulate/precuneous, and 
insula. MCI individuals that converted to AD had mostly AD-like baseline CSF 
biomarkers. MCI nonconverters (MCI-NC) had mixed baseline SPARE-AD and CSF 
values, suggesting that some MCI-NC subjects may later convert. Those MCI-NC 
with most negative baseline SPARE-AD scores (normal brain structure) had 
significantly higher baseline Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores 
(28.67) than others, and relatively low annual rate of Mini Mental State 
Examination decrease (-0.25). MCI-NC with midlevel baseline SPARE-AD displayed 
faster annual rates of SPARE-AD increase (indicating progressing atrophy). 
SPARE-AD and CSF combination improved prediction over individual values. In 
summary, both SPARE-AD and CSF biomarkers showed high baseline sensitivity, 
however, many MCI-NC had abnormal baseline SPARE-AD and CSF biomarkers. Longer 
follow-up will elucidate the specificity of baseline measurements.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.05.023
PMCID: PMC2951483
PMID: 20594615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Alzheimers Dement. 2014 May;10(3):366-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.02.010. Epub 
2013 May 30.

Variants in PPP3R1 and MAPT are associated with more rapid functional decline in 
Alzheimer's disease: the Cache County Dementia Progression Study.

Peterson D(1), Munger C(1), Crowley J(1), Corcoran C(2), Cruchaga C(3), Goate 
AM(4), Norton MC(5), Green RC(6), Munger RG(7), Breitner JC(8), Welsh-Bohmer 
KA(9), Lyketsos C(10), Tschanz J(11), Kauwe JS(12); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Utah State University, Logan, UT, 
USA; Center for Epidemiologic Studies, Utah State University, Logan, UT, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO, USA; Hope Center for Neurological Disorders, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(5)Center for Epidemiologic Studies, Utah State University, Logan, UT, USA; 
Department of Family Consumer and Human Development, Utah State University, 
Logan, UT, USA; Department of Psychology, Utah State University, Logan, UT, USA.
(6)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine and Partners Center for 
Personalized Genetic Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Nutrition Dietetics and Food Sciences, Utah State University, 
Logan, UT, USA.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(9)Departments of Psychiatry and Medicine, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(10)Department of Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.
(11)Center for Epidemiologic Studies, Utah State University, Logan, UT, USA; 
Department of Psychology, Utah State University, Logan, UT, USA.
(12)Department of Biology, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA. Electronic 
address: kauwe@byu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in the gene encoding 
the regulatory subunit of the protein phosphatase 2B (PPP3R1, rs1868402) and the 
microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT, rs3785883) gene were recently 
associated with higher cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tau levels in samples from the 
Knight Alzheimer's Disease Research Center at Washington University (WU) and 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). In these same samples, these 
SNPs were also associated with faster functional decline, or progression of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) as measured by the Clinical Dementia Rating sum of 
boxes scores (CDR-sb). We attempted to validate the latter association in an 
independent, population-based sample of incident AD cases from the Cache County 
Dementia Progression Study (DPS).
METHODS: All 92 AD cases from the DPS with a global CDR-sb ≤1 (mild) at initial 
clinical assessment who were later assessed on CDR-sb data on at least two other 
time points were genotyped at the two SNPs of interest (rs1868402 and 
rs3785883). We used linear mixed models to estimate associations between these 
SNPs and CDR-sb trajectory. All analyses were performed using Proc Mixed in SAS.
RESULTS: Although we observed no association between rs3785883 or rs1868402 
alone and change in CDR-sb (P > .10), there was a significant association 
between a combined genotype model and change in CDR-sb: carriers of the 
high-risk genotypes at both loci progressed >2.9 times faster than noncarriers 
(P = .015). When data from DPS were combined with previously published data from 
WU and ADNI, change in CDR-sb was 30% faster for each copy of the high-risk 
allele at rs3785883 (P = .0082) and carriers of both high-risk genotypes at both 
loci progressed 6 times faster (P < .0001) than all others combined.
CONCLUSIONS: We replicate a previous report by Cruchaga et al that specific 
variations in rs3785883 and rs1868402 are associated with accelerated 
progression of AD. Further characterization of this association will provide a 
better understanding of how genetic factors influence the rate of progression of 
AD and could provide novel insights into preventative and therapeutic 
strategies.

Copyright © 2014 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.02.010
PMCID: PMC3809344
PMID: 23727081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Neuroimage. 2009 May 1;45(4):1107-16. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.12.072. 
Epub 2009 Jan 21.

Categorical and correlational analyses of baseline fluorodeoxyglucose positron 
emission tomography images from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI).

Langbaum JB(1), Chen K, Lee W, Reschke C, Bandy D, Fleisher AS, Alexander GE, 
Foster NL, Weiner MW, Koeppe RA, Jagust WJ, Reiman EM; Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Banner Alzheimer's Institute and Banner Good Samaritan PET Center, Phoenix, 
AZ, USA.

In mostly small single-center studies, Alzheimer's disease (AD) is associated 
with characteristic and progressive reductions in fluorodeoxyglucose positron 
emission tomography (PET) measurements of the regional cerebral metabolic rate 
for glucose (CMRgl). The AD Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) is acquiring FDG PET, 
volumetric magnetic resonance imaging, and other biomarker measurements in a 
large longitudinal multi-center study of initially mildly affected probable AD 
(pAD) patients, amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) patients, who are at 
increased AD risk, and cognitively normal controls (NC), and we are responsible 
for analyzing the PET images using statistical parametric mapping (SPM). Here we 
compare baseline CMRgl measurements from 74 pAD patients and 142 aMCI patients 
to those from 82 NC, we correlate CMRgl with categorical and continuous measures 
of clinical disease severity, and we compare apolipoprotein E (APOE) varepsilon4 
carriers to non-carriers in each of these subject groups. In comparison with NC, 
the pAD and aMCI groups each had significantly lower CMRgl bilaterally in 
posterior cingulate, precuneus, parietotemporal and frontal cortex. Similar 
reductions were observed when categories of disease severity or lower 
Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) scores were correlated with lower CMRgl. However, 
when analyses were restricted to the pAD patients, lower MMSE scores were 
significantly correlated with lower left frontal and temporal CMRgl. These 
findings from a large, multi-site study support previous single-site findings, 
supports the characteristic pattern of baseline CMRgl reductions in AD and aMCI 
patients, as well as preferential anterior CMRgl reductions after the onset of 
AD dementia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.12.072
PMCID: PMC2886795
PMID: 19349228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Affect Disord. 2020 Sep 1;274:262-268. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2020.05.097. Epub 
2020 May 23.

Associations of Subsyndromal Symptomatic Depression with Cognitive Decline and 
Brain Atrophy in Elderly Individuals without Dementia: A Longitudinal Study.

Zhang Z(1), Wei F(2), Shen XN(3), Ma YH(1), Chen KL(3), Dong Q(3), Tan L(4), Yu 
JT(5); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(2)Department of Psychological Medicine, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China. Electronic address: dr.tanlan@163.com.
(5)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. Electronic address: 
jintai_yu@fudan.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Subsyndromal symptomatic depression (SSD) is prevalent in older 
adults. However, it remains unclear whether there are effects of SSD on brain 
aging outcomes (cognition and brain structures), especially in the presence of 
Alzheimer's Disease (AD) pathology.
METHODS: A total of 1,188 adults without dementia were recruited from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. Participants with 
SSD were measured using the 15-item Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS-15). In 
multivariable models, the cross-sectional and longitudinal associations of SSD 
with brain aging outcomes were explored. We further evaluated whether baseline 
amyloid-β (Aβ) load modifies the relations between SSD and brain aging outcomes.
RESULTS: SSD at baseline was associated with significantly longitudinal decline 
in cognition and displayed significantly accelerated atrophy in hippocampus 
(β = -29.53, p = 0.001) and middle temporal gyrus (β = - 77.82, p = 0.006) among 
all participants and Aβ-Positive individuals. SSD interacted with baseline Aβ 
load in predicting longitudinal decline in Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
(β = - 0.327, p = 0.023), episodic memory (β = -0.065, p = 0.004) and increase 
in Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale Cognition 13-item scale (ADAS-cog13) 
(β = 0.754, p = 0.026).
LIMITATIONS: Our study didn't look at AD diagnosis but Aβ status.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggested that older people without dementia with both 
SSD and a high level of Aβ load may have higher risk of cognitive deterioration 
and brain atrophy. Therapeutic mitigation of depressive symptoms, especially in 
those with abnormal Aβ levels, may help delay progressive decline in cognition.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2020.05.097
PMID: 32469814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.


312. JAMA. 2017 Jun 13;317(22):2305-2316. doi: 10.1001/jama.2017.6669.

Association Between Elevated Brain Amyloid and Subsequent Cognitive Decline 
Among Cognitively Normal Persons.

Donohue MC(1), Sperling RA(2), Petersen R(3), Sun CK(1), Weiner MW(4), Aisen 
PS(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute, Department of Neurology, 
University of Southern California, San Diego.
(2)Center for Alzheimer Research and Treatment, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts3Department of Neurology, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts4Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston.
(3)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(4)Center for Imaging of Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of 
California-San Francisco7San Francisco VA Medical Center, San Francisco, 
California.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2017 Jun 13;317(22):2285-2287. doi: 10.1001/jama.2017.6895.
    JAMA. 2017 Oct 10;318(14):1392-1393. doi: 10.1001/jama.2017.12951.

IMPORTANCE: Among cognitively normal individuals, elevated brain amyloid 
(defined by cerebrospinal fluid assays or positron emission tomography regional 
summaries) can be related to risk for later Alzheimer-related cognitive decline.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize and quantify the risk for Alzheimer-related cognitive 
decline among cognitively normal individuals with elevated brain amyloid.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Exploratory analyses were conducted with 
longitudinal cognitive and biomarker data from 445 cognitively normal 
individuals in the United States and Canada. Participants were observed from 
August 23, 2005, to June 7, 2016, for a median of 3.1 years (interquartile 
range, 2.0-4.2 years; maximum follow-up, 10.3 years) as part of the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).
EXPOSURES: Individuals were classified at baseline as having normal (n = 243) or 
elevated (n = 202) brain amyloid using positron emission tomography amyloid 
imaging or a cerebrospinal fluid assay of amyloid β.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Outcomes included scores on the Preclinical 
Alzheimer Cognitive Composite (PACC; a sum of 4 baseline standardized z scores, 
which decreases with worse performance), Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE; 0 
[worst] to 30 [best] points), Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDR-Sum of 
Boxes; 0 [best] to 18 [worst] points), and Logical Memory Delayed Recall (0 
[worst] to 25 [best] story units).
RESULTS: Among the 445 participants (243 with normal amyloid, 202 with elevated 
amyloid), mean (SD) age was 74.0 (5.9) years, mean education was 16.4 (2.7) 
years, and 52% were women. The mean score for PACC at baseline was 0.00 (2.60); 
for MMSE, 29.0 (1.2); for CDR-Sum of Boxes, 0.04 (0.14); and for Logical Memory 
Delayed Recall, 13.1 (3.3). Compared with the group with normal amyloid, those 
with elevated amyloid had worse mean scores at 4 years on the PACC (mean 
difference, 1.51 points [95% CI, 0.94-2.10]; P < .001), MMSE (mean difference, 
0.56 points [95% CI, 0.32-0.80]; P < .001), and CDR-Sum of Boxes (mean 
difference, 0.23 points [95% CI, 0.08-0.38]; P = .002). For Logical Memory 
Delayed Recall, between-group score was not statistically significant at 4 years 
(mean difference, 0.73 story units [95% CI, -0.02 to 1.48]; P = .056).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Exploratory analyses of a cognitively normal cohort 
followed up for a median of 3.1 years suggest that elevation in baseline brain 
amyloid level, compared with normal brain amyloid level, was associated with 
higher likelihood of cognitive decline, although the findings are of uncertain 
clinical significance. Further research is needed to assess the clinical 
importance of these differences and measure longer-term associations.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2017.6669
PMCID: PMC5736301
PMID: 28609533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors 
have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential 
Conflicts of Interest.


313. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Nov 26:2024.11.03.24316667. doi: 
10.1101/2024.11.03.24316667.

Blood DNA Methylation Signature for Incident Dementia: Evidence from 
Longitudinal Cohorts.

Zhang W(1), Young JI(2)(3), Gomez L(3), Schmidt MA(2)(3), Lukacsovich D(1), 
Kunkle BW(2)(3), Chen X(1)(4), Martin ER(2)(3), Wang L(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Sciences, University 
of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(2)Dr. John T Macdonald Foundation Department of Human Genetics, University of 
Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(3)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(4)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miller School of 
Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Distinguishing between molecular changes that precede dementia 
onset and those resulting from the disease is challenging with cross-sectional 
studies.
METHODS: We studied blood DNA methylation (DNAm) differences and incident 
dementia in two large longitudinal cohorts: the Offspring cohort of the 
Framingham Heart Study (FHS) and the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) study. We analyzed blood DNAm samples from over 1,000 cognitively 
unimpaired subjects.
RESULTS: Meta-analysis identified 44 CpGs and 44 differentially methylated 
regions consistently associated with time to dementia in both cohorts. Our 
integrative analysis identified early processes in dementia, such as immune 
responses and metabolic dysfunction. Furthermore, we developed a 
Methylation-based Risk Score, which successfully predicted future cognitive 
decline in an independent validation set, even after accounting for age, sex, 
APOE ε4, years of education, baseline diagnosis, and baseline MMSE score.
DISCUSSION: DNA methylation offers a promising source of biomarker for early 
detection of dementia.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.11.03.24316667
PMCID: PMC11623760
PMID: 39649611

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.


314. Neurobiol Dis. 2020 Jun;139:104810. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2020.104810. Epub 2020 
Feb 19.

Cerebrospinal fluid ceruloplasmin levels predict cognitive decline and brain 
atrophy in people with underlying β-amyloid pathology.

Diouf I(1), Bush AI(2), Ayton S(3); Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Melbourne Dementia Research Centre, The Florey Institute for Neuroscience and 
Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; CSIRO Health 
and Biosecurity/Australian E-Health Research Centre, Brisbane, Australia.
(2)Melbourne Dementia Research Centre, The Florey Institute for Neuroscience and 
Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Melbourne Dementia Research Centre, The Florey Institute for Neuroscience and 
Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. Electronic 
address: scott.ayton@florey.edu.au.

OBJECTIVES: The mechanisms leading to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) may involve oxidative stress and neuroinflammation. Ceruloplasmin (Cp) is a 
circulating protein that intersects both these pathways, since its expression is 
increased during the acute phase response, and the protein acts to lower 
pro-oxidant iron in cells. Since the role of Cp in AD, and its potential for use 
as a biomarker is not established, we investigated CSF Cp and its association 
with longitudinal outcome measures related to AD.
METHODS: This was an observational study of 268 people from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging (ADNI) cohort. Subjects were classified clinically as 
having AD, mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or were cognitively normal (CN), and 
were also classified as being positive for β-amyloid using established 
thresholds in the CSF t-tau/Aβ42 ratio. Subjects underwent cognitive tests and 
MRI studies every 6 months for 2 years, then yearly thereafter for up to 
6 years.
RESULTS: At baseline, CSF Cp was not associated with clinical or pathological 
diagnosis, but we found an unexpected association between CSF Cp and levels of 
CSF apolipoprotein E. In longitudinal analysis, high level of CSF Cp was 
associated with accelerated cognitive decline (as assessed by ADAS-Cog, CDR-SB, 
and MMSE) and ventricular volume enlargement in people classified as MCI and who 
had underlying β-amyloid pathology.
CONCLUSION: These results raise new questions into the role of Cp in 
neuroinflammation, oxidative stress, and APOE pathways involved in AD, and 
reveal the potential for this protein to be used as a biomarker in disease 
prognostication.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2020.104810
PMCID: PMC7150625
PMID: 32087292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Arch Neurol. 2011 Jan;68(1):58-66. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.343.

Treatment with cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine of patients in the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Schneider LS(1), Insel PS, Weiner MW; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and the Behavioral Sciences, University of Southern 
California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. lschneid@usc.edu

Comment in
    Arch Neurol. 2011 Jan;68(1):19-21. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.344.

OBJECTIVES: To assess the clinical characteristics and course of patients with 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and mild Alzheimer disease (AD) treated with 
cholinesterase inhibitors (ChEIs) and memantine hydrochloride.
DESIGN: Cohort study.
SETTING: The 59 recruiting sites for the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI).
PARTICIPANTS: Outpatients with MCI and AD in ADNI.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The AD Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale (ADAS-cog), 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale, and 
Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ).
RESULTS: A total of 177 (44.0%) of 402 MCI patients and 159 (84.6%) of 188 
mild-AD patients were treated with ChEIs and 11.4% of MCI patients and 45.7% of 
AD patients with memantine at entry. Mild-cognitive-impairment patients who 
received ChEIs with or without memantine were more impaired, showed greater 
decline in scores, and progressed to dementia sooner than patients who did not 
receive ChEIs. Alzheimer-disease patients who received ChEIs and memantine took 
them longer, were more functionally impaired, and showed greater decline on the 
MMSE and CDR (but not on the ADAS-cog or FAQ) than those who received ChEIs 
only.
CONCLUSIONS: Academic physicians frequently prescribe ChEIs and memantine 
earlier than indicated in the US Food and Drug Administration-approved labeling 
to patients who are relatively more severely impaired or who are rapidly 
progressing toward cognitive impairment. The use of these medications in ADNI is 
associated with clinical decline and may affect the interpretation of clinical 
trial outcomes.
STUDY REGISTRATION: clinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT00106899.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.343
PMCID: PMC3259850
PMID: 21220675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2014 May 24;10:929-52. doi: 10.2147/NDT.S62323. 
eCollection 2014.

Disease progression model for Clinical Dementia Rating-Sum of Boxes in mild 
cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's subjects from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Samtani MN(1), Raghavan N(1), Novak G(1), Nandy P(1), Narayan VA(1).

Author information:
(1)Janssen Research and Development, LLC, Raritan, New Jersey, USA.

BACKGROUND: The objective of this analysis was to develop a nonlinear disease 
progression model, using an expanded set of covariates that captures the 
longitudinal Clinical Dementia Rating Scale-Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) scores. These 
were derived from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative ADNI-1 study, 
of 301 Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment patients who were 
followed for 2-3 years.
METHODS: The model describes progression rate and baseline disease score as a 
function of covariates. The covariates that were tested fell into five groups: 
a) hippocampal volume; b) serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers; c) 
demographics and apolipoprotein Epsilon 4 (ApoE4) allele status; d) baseline 
cognitive tests; and e) disease state and comedications.
RESULTS: Covariates associated with baseline disease severity were disease 
state, hippocampal volume, and comedication use. Disease progression rate was 
influenced by baseline CSF biomarkers, Trail-Making Test part A score, delayed 
logical memory test score, and current level of impairment as measured by 
CDR-SB. The rate of disease progression was dependent on disease severity, with 
intermediate scores around the inflection point score of 10 exhibiting high 
disease progression rate. The CDR-SB disease progression rate in a typical 
patient, with late mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease, was 
estimated to be approximately 0.5 and 1.4 points/year, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, this model describes disease progression in terms of 
CDR-SB changes in patients and its dependency on novel covariates. The CSF 
biomarkers included in the model discriminate mild cognitive impairment subjects 
as progressors and nonprogressors. Therefore, the model may be utilized for 
optimizing study designs, through patient population enrichment and clinical 
trial simulations.

DOI: 10.2147/NDT.S62323
PMCID: PMC4049432
PMID: 24926196


317. Front Aging Neurosci. 2017 Feb 2;9:13. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00013. 
eCollection 2017.

MRI-Based Classification Models in Prediction of Mild Cognitive Impairment and 
Dementia in Late-Life Depression.

Lebedeva AK(1), Westman E(1), Borza T(2), Beyer MK(3), Engedal K(4), Aarsland 
D(5), Selbaek G(6), Haberg AK(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Centre for Old Age Psychiatric Research, Innlandet Hospital TrustBrumunddal, 
Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
OsloOslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, 
Rikshospitalet Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Oslo University HospitalTønsberg, Norway; 
Oslo and Norwegian National Advisory Unit for Aging and HealthTønsberg, Norway.
(5)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska 
InstitutetStockholm, Sweden; Department of Old Age Psychiatry, Institute of 
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College LondonLondon, UK; Center 
for Age-Related Medicine, Stavanger University HospitalStavanger, Norway.
(6)Centre for Old Age Psychiatric Research, Innlandet Hospital TrustBrumunddal, 
Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
OsloOslo, Norway; Department of Geriatric Medicine, Oslo University 
HospitalTønsberg, Norway; Oslo and Norwegian National Advisory Unit for Aging 
and HealthTønsberg, Norway.
(7)Department of Neuroscience, Norwegian University of Science and 
TechnologyTrondheim, Norway; Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, St. 
Olav's University HospitalTrondheim, Norway.

Objective: Late-life depression (LLD) is associated with development of 
different types of dementia. Identification of LLD patients, who will develop 
cognitive decline, i.e., the early stage of dementia would help to implement 
interventions earlier. The purpose of this study was to assess whether 
structural brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in LLD patients can predict 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or dementia 1 year prior to the diagnosis. 
Methods: LLD patients underwent brain MRI at baseline and repeated clinical 
assessment after 1-year. Structural brain measurements were obtained using 
Freesurfer software (v. 5.1) from the T1W brain MRI images. MRI-based Random 
Forest classifier was used to discriminate between LLD who developed MCI or 
dementia after 1-year follow-up and cognitively stable LLD. Additionally, a 
previously established Random Forest model trained on 185 patients with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) vs. 225 cognitively normal elderly from the Alzheimer's 
disease Neuroimaging Initiative was tested on the LLD data set (ADNI model). 
Results: MCI and dementia diagnoses were predicted in LLD patients with 
76%/68%/84% accuracy/sensitivity/specificity. Adding the baseline Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE) scores to the models improved 
accuracy/sensitivity/specificity to 81%/75%/86%. The best model predicted MCI 
status alone using MRI and baseline MMSE scores with 
accuracy/sensitivity/specificity of 89%/85%/90%. The most important region for 
all the models was right ventral diencephalon, including hypothalamus. Its 
volume correlated negatively with the number of depressive episodes. ADNI model 
trained on AD vs. Controls using SV could predict MCI-DEM patients with 67% 
accuracy. Conclusion: LDD patients developing MCI and dementia can be 
discriminated from LLD patients remaining cognitively stable with good accuracy 
based on baseline structural MRI alone. Baseline MMSE score improves prediction 
accuracy. Ventral diencephalon, including the hypothalamus might play an 
important role in preservation of cognitive functions in LLD.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00013
PMCID: PMC5288688
PMID: 28210220


318. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014 Jul;22(7):698-707. doi: 
10.1016/j.jagp.2012.10.028. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

Psychosis in Alzheimer's disease is associated with frontal metabolic impairment 
and accelerated decline in working memory: findings from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Koppel J(1), Sunday S(2), Goldberg TE(2), Davies P(2), Christen E(2), Greenwald 
BS(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Litwin Zucker Alzheimer's Research Center, Manhasset, NY. Electronic address: 
jkoppel@nshs.edu.
(2)Litwin Zucker Alzheimer's Research Center, Manhasset, NY.

OBJECTIVE: An ascendant body of evidence suggests that Alzheimer disease with 
psychosis (AD+P) is a distinct variant of illness with its own genetic diathesis 
and a unique clinical course. Impaired frontal lobe function has been previously 
implicated in AD+P. The current exploratory study, presented in two parts, 
evaluates both the regional brain metabolic and psychometric correlates of 
psychosis in a longitudinal sample of subjects with AD, made available by the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).
METHODS: In Part 1 of the study, 21 ADNI participants with AD who developed 
psychotic symptoms during the study but were not psychotic at baseline were 
matched with 21 participants with AD who never became psychotic during the study 
period, and mean brain [F(18)]fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography 
(FDG-PET) Cerebral metabolic rate for glucose (CMRgl) by regions of interest 
(ROIs) were compared Additionally, 39 participants with active psychosis at the 
time of image acquisition were matched with 39 participants who were never 
psychotic during the study period, and mean brain FDG-PET CMRgl by sROI were 
compared. In Part 2 of the study, 354 ADNI participants with AD who were 
followed for 24 months with serial psychometric testing were identified, and 
cognitive performance and decline were evaluated for correlation with psychotic 
symptoms.
RESULTS: Part 1: There were no regional brain metabolic differences between 
those with AD destined to become psychotic and those who did not become 
psychotic. There was a significant reduction in mean orbitofrontal brain 
metabolism in those with active psychosis. Part 2: Over the course of study 
follow-up, psychosis was associated with accelerated decline in functional 
performance as measured by the Functional Assessment Questionnaire, the 
Mini-Mental State Examination, and Forward Digit Span.
CONCLUSION: In a sample drawn from the ADNI dataset, our exploratory FDG-PET 
findings and longitudinal cognitive outcomes support the hypofrontality model of 
AD+P. Focal frontal vulnerability may mediate the accelerated decline seen in 
AD+P.

Copyright © 2014 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jagp.2012.10.028
PMID: 23672944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Neuroimage. 2010 May 15;51(1):488-99. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.125. 
Epub 2010 Jan 18.

Automated 3D mapping of baseline and 12-month associations between three verbal 
memory measures and hippocampal atrophy in 490 ADNI subjects.

Apostolova LG(1), Morra JH, Green AE, Hwang KS, Avedissian C, Woo E, Cummings 
JL, Toga AW, Jack CR Jr, Weiner MW, Thompson PM; Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, 
CA 90095, USA. lapostolova@mednet.ucla.edu

We used a previously validated automated machine learning algorithm based on 
adaptive boosting to segment the hippocampi in baseline and 12-month follow-up 
3D T1-weighted brain MRIs of 150 cognitively normal elderly (NC), 245 mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) and 97 Dementia of the Alzheimer's type (DAT) ADNI 
subjects. Using the radial distance mapping technique, we examined the 
hippocampal correlates of delayed recall performance on three well-established 
verbal memory tests--ADAScog delayed recall (ADAScog-DR), the Rey Auditory 
Verbal Learning Test -DR (AVLT-DR) and Wechsler Logical Memory II-DR (LM II-DR). 
We observed no significant correlations between delayed recall performance and 
hippocampal radial distance on any of the three verbal memory measures in NC. 
All three measures were associated with hippocampal volumes and radial distance 
in the full sample and in the MCI group at baseline and at follow-up. In DAT we 
observed stronger left-sided associations between hippocampal radial distance, 
LM II-DR and ADAScog-DR both at baseline and at follow-up. The strongest linkage 
between memory performance and hippocampal atrophy in the MCI sample was 
observed with the most challenging verbal memory test-the AVLT-DR, as opposed to 
the DAT sample where the least challenging test the ADAScog-DR showed strongest 
associations with the hippocampal structure. After controlling for baseline 
hippocampal atrophy, memory performance showed regionally specific associations 
with hippocampal radial distance in predominantly CA1 but also in subicular 
distribution.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.125
PMCID: PMC2847034
PMID: 20083211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Transl Psychiatry. 2014 Jul 29;4(7):e419. doi: 10.1038/tp.2014.58.

Cerebrospinal fluid markers including trefoil factor 3 are associated with 
neurodegeneration in amyloid-positive individuals.

Paterson RW(1), Bartlett JW(2), Blennow K(3), Fox NC(1); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative; Shaw LM(4), Trojanowski JQ(4), Zetterberg H(5), Schott 
JM(1).

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Shaw 
LM, Khachaturian Z, Sorensen G, Carrillo M, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies 
P, Fillit H, Hefti F, Holtzman D, Mesulam M, Potter W, Snyder P, Schwartz A, 
Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, 
Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, Beckett L, Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, 
Bernstein M, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, 
Senjem M, Vemuri P, Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, 
Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Morris JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, 
Taylor-Reinwald L, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga 
AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, 
Nho K, Weiner MW, Thal L, Khachaturian Z, Thal L, Buckholtz N, Weiner MW, Snyder 
PJ, Potter W, Paul S, Albert M, Frank R, Khachaturian Z, Hsiao J, Kaye J, Quinn 
J, Lind B, Carter R, Dolen S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Teodoro L, 
Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Fleisher A, Heidebrink JL, Lord JL, Petersen 
R, Mason SS, Albers CS, Knopman D, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, 
Chowdhury M, Rountree S, Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Ances B, Morris JC, 
Carroll M, Leon S, Householder E, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Oliver A, Marson D, 
Griffith R, Clark D, Geldmacher D, Brockington J, Roberson E, Grossman H, Mitsis 
E, deToledo-Morrell L, Shah RC, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Roberts P, Albert M, 
Onyike C, D'Agostino D 2nd, Kielb S, Galvin JE, Pogorelec DM, Cerbone B, Michel 
CA, Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, Glodzik L, De Santi S, Doraiswamy P, Petrella JR, 
Wong TZ, Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk D, Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, Sinha P, 
Oates E, Conrad G, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein 
BS, Martin K, Makino KM, Ismail M, Brand C, Mulnard RA, Thai G, Mc-Adams-Ortiz 
C, Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Diaz-Arrastia R, King R, Weiner M, 
Martin-Cook K, DeVous M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Anderson HS, 
Swerdlow RH, Apostolova L, Tingus K, Woo E, Silverman DH, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, 
Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Kendall T, Johnson H, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews 
BR, Herring S, Hunt C, van Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Chertkow H, Bergman 
H, Hosein C, Black S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GY, Feldman H, Mudge B, 
Assaly M, Kertesz A, Rogers J, Trost D, Bernick C, Munic D, Kerwin D, Mesulam 
MM, Lipowski K, Wu CK, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Turner RS, 
Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall G, Frey M, Yesavage J, 
Taylor JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh MN, Belden CM, Jacobson SA, 
Sirrel SA, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, Obisesan TO, 
Wolday S, Allard J, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Hudson L, Fletcher E, Carmichael O, 
Olichney J, DeCarli C, Kittur S, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana 
S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, Tariot P, Fleisher A, Reeder S, 
Bates V, Capote H, Rainka M, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Adeli A, Zimmerman EA, 
Celmins D, Brown AD, Pearlson GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Santulli RB, Kitzmiller 
TJ, Schwartz ES, Sink KM, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Querfurth H, 
Tremont G, Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Mintzer J, 
Spicer K, Bachman D, Finger E, Pasternak S, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, 
Drost D, Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, Schultz SK, Ponto LL, Shim H, Smith 
KE, Relkin N, Chaing G, Raudin L, Smith A, Fargher K, Raj BA, Weiner MW, Aisen 
P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Green RC, Harvey D, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, 
Morris JC, Saykin AJ, Shaw LM, Toga AW, Trojanowki JQ, Neylan T, Grafman J, 
Green RC, Montine T, Weiner M, Petersen R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, 
Gessert D, Sather T, Davis M, Morrison R, Jiminez G, Neylan T, Hayes J, Finley 
S, Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, 
Kantarci K, Ward C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Landau S, 
Morris JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, 
Figurski M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, 
Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Friedl K, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera 
M, Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Fleischman D, Arfanakis 
K, Shah RC, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Doraiswamy PM, Petrella JR, James O, 
Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein B, Martin KS, Mulnard RA, Thai G, McAdams-Ortiz C, 
Mintzer J, Massoglia D, Brawman-Mintzer O, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, 
Jagust W, Landau S, Turner RS, Behan K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, 
Marshall G, Sabbagh MN, Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Obisesan TO, Wolday S, Allard J, 
Johnson SC, Fruehling JJ, Harding S, Peskind ER, Petrie EC, Li G, Yesavage JA, 
Taylor JL, Furst AJ, Relkin N, Chaing G, Ravdin L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegeneration, Dementia Research Centre, UCL Institute of 
Neurology, London, UK.
(2)Department of Medical Statistics, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine, London.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute on Aging and 
Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)1] Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden [2] 
Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK.

We aimed to identify cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers associated with 
neurodegeneration in individuals with and without CSF evidence of Alzheimer 
pathology. We investigated 287 Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) subjects (age=74.9±6.9; 22/48/30% with Alzheimer's disease/mild cognitive 
impairment/controls) with CSF multiplex analyte data and serial volumetric MRI. 
We calculated brain and hippocampal atrophy rates, ventricular expansion and 
Mini Mental State Examination decline. We used false discovery rate corrected 
regression analyses to assess associations between CSF variables and atrophy 
rates in individuals with and without amyloid pathology, adjusting in stages for 
tau, baseline volume, p-tau, age, sex, ApoE4 status and diagnosis. Analytes 
showing statistically significant independent relationships were entered into 
reverse stepwise analyses. Adjusting for tau, baseline volume, p-tau, age, sex 
and ApoE4, 4/83 analytes were significantly independently associated with brain 
atrophy rate, 1/83 with ventricular expansion and 2/83 with hippocampal atrophy. 
The strongest CSF predictor for the three atrophy measures was low trefoil 
factor 3 (TFF3). High cystatin C (CysC) was associated with higher whole brain 
atrophy and hippocampal atrophy rates. Lower levels of vascular endothelial 
growth factor and chromogranin A (CrA) were associated with higher whole brain 
atrophy. In exploratory reverse stepwise analyses, lower TFF3 was associated 
with higher rates of whole brain, hippocampal atrophy and ventricular expansion. 
Lower levels of CrA were associated with higher whole brain atrophy rate. The 
relationship between low TFF3 and increased hippocampal atrophy rate remained 
after adjustment for diagnosis. We identified a series of CSF markers that are 
independently associated with rate of neurodegeneration in amyloid-positive 
individuals. TFF3, a substrate for NOTCH processing may be an important 
biomarker of neurodegeneration across the Alzheimer spectrum.

DOI: 10.1038/tp.2014.58
PMCID: PMC4119225
PMID: 25072324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2013 Sep;21(9):906-14. doi: 10.1016/j.jagp.2013.01.021. 
Epub 2013 Feb 6.

The effect of subsyndromal symptoms of depression and white matter lesions on 
disability for individuals with mild cognitive impairment.

Mackin RS(1), Insel P, Tosun D, Mueller SG, Schuff N, Truran-Sacrey D, 
Raptentsetsang ST, Lee JY, Jack CR Jr, Aisen PS, Petersen RC, Weiner MW; 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Center for Imaging of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Veterans Administration 
Medical Center, San Francisco, CA; Department of Psychiatry, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA. Electronic address: scottm@lppi.ucsf.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the effect of subsyndromal symptoms of depression (SSD) on 
ratings of disability for individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: Data from 405 MCI participants from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) study were analyzed. Participants were evaluated 
at baseline and at 6-month intervals over 2 years. Severity of depressive 
symptoms was rated utilizing the Geriatric Depression Scale. Disability was 
assessed utilizing the Functional Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ). Other clinical 
variables included white matter lesion (WML) and intracranial brain (ICV) 
volumes derived from magnetic resonance imaging, ratings of overall cognitive 
function (Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale, ADAS), and apolipoprotein E 
(ApoE) status. Demographic variables included age, education, and gender.
RESULTS: SSD individuals had a lower volume of WML and higher frequency of ApoE 
ε4 alleles than nondepressed participants but the two groups did not differ with 
respect to other clinical or demographic variables. At baseline, SSD individuals 
were 1.77 times more likely to have poorer FAQ scores than individuals with no 
symptoms of depression after controlling for the effect of cognitive 
functioning, ICV, WML, and ApoE status. The presence of SSD at baseline was not 
associated with a poorer course of disability outcomes, cognitive functioning, 
or conversion to dementia over 24 months.
CONCLUSIONS: SSD demonstrated a significant impact on disability for MCI 
individuals, who are also at high risk for functional limitations related to 
neurodegenerative disease. Therefore, the treatment of SSD may represent a 
significant avenue to reduce the burden of disability in this vulnerable patient 
population.

Copyright © 2013 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jagp.2013.01.021
PMCID: PMC5548455
PMID: 23567388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Apr;35(4):808-18. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.09.039. Epub 2013 Oct 3.

Operationalizing hippocampal volume as an enrichment biomarker for amnestic mild 
cognitive impairment trials: effect of algorithm, test-retest variability, and 
cut point on trial cost, duration, and sample size.

Yu P(1), Sun J(2), Wolz R(3), Stephenson D(4), Brewer J(5), Fox NC(6), Cole 
PE(7), Jack CR Jr(8), Hill DL(9), Schwarz AJ(10); Coalition Against Major 
Diseases and the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Informatics, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(2)Informatics, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA; Biostatistics 
Division, School of Public Health, University of Texas, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)IXICO Ltd, London, UK; Department of Computing, Imperial College, London, UK.
(4)Critical Path Institute, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(5)Departments of Radiology and Neurosciences, University of San Diego, San 
Diego, CA, USA.
(6)Dementia Research Centre, University College Institute of Neurology, London, 
UK.
(7)Tailored Therapeutics, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(8)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(9)IXICO Ltd, London, UK; Dementia Research Centre, University College Institute 
of Neurology, London, UK.
(10)Tailored Therapeutics, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA. 
Electronic address: a.schwarz@lilly.com.

The objective of this study was to evaluate the effect of computational 
algorithm, measurement variability, and cut point on hippocampal volume 
(HCV)-based patient selection for clinical trials in mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI). We used normal control and amnestic MCI subjects from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 1 (ADNI-1) as normative reference and screening 
cohorts. We evaluated the enrichment performance of 4 widely used hippocampal 
segmentation algorithms (FreeSurfer, Hippocampus Multi-Atlas Propagation and 
Segmentation (HMAPS), Learning Embeddings Atlas Propagation (LEAP), and 
NeuroQuant) in terms of 2-year changes in Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog), and Clinical 
Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB). We modeled the implications for sample 
size, screen fail rates, and trial cost and duration. HCV based patient 
selection yielded reduced sample sizes (by ∼40%-60%) and lower trial costs (by 
∼30%-40%) across a wide range of cut points. These results provide a guide to 
the choice of HCV cut point for amnestic MCI clinical trials, allowing an 
informed tradeoff between statistical and practical considerations.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.09.039
PMCID: PMC4201941
PMID: 24211008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2024;11(4):908-916. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2024.82.

Predicting Cognitive Decline for Non-Demented Adults with High Burden of Tau 
Pathology, Independent of Amyloid Status.

Wu HS(1), Li L, Sun QQ, Tan CC, Tan L, Xu W.

Author information:
(1)Dr. Wei Xu, MD, PhD, Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, 
Qingdao, China, Donghai Middle Road, No.5, Qingdao, China. E-mail address: 
dr_xuwei@qdu.edu.cn or 1037219730@qq.com.

BACKGROUND: Abnormal tau proteins are independent contributors to cognitive 
impairment. Nevertheless, not all individuals exposed to high-level tau 
pathology will develop cognitive dysfunction. We aimed to construct a model to 
predict cognitive trajectory for this high-risk population.
METHOD: Longitudinal data of 181 non-demented adults (mean age= 73.1; female= 
45%), who were determined to have high cerebral burden of abnormal tau by 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) measurements of phosphorylated tau (ptau181) or total 
tau, were derived from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
database. Cognitive decline was defined as Mini-Mental State Examination scores 
decline ≥ 3 over three years. A predictive nomogram was constructed using 
stepwise backward regression method. The discrimination, calibration, and 
clinical usefulness of the nomogram were evaluated. The model was validated in 
another 189 non-demented adults via a cross-sectional set (n=149, mean age = 
73.9, female = 51%) and a longitudinal set (n= 40, mean age = 75, female = 48%). 
Finally, the relationships of the calculated risk scores with cognitive decline 
and risk of Alzheimer's disease were examined during an extended 8-year 
follow-up.
RESULT: Lower volume of hippocampus (odds ratio [OR] = 0.37, p< 0.001), lower 
levels of CSF sTREM2 (OR = 0.76, p = 0.003), higher scores of Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive (OR = 1.15, p = 0.001) and Functional 
Activities Questionnaire (OR = 1.16, p = 0.016), and number of APOE ε4 (OR = 
1.88, p = 0.039) were associated with higher risk of cognitive decline 
independent of the amyloid status and were included in the final model. The 
nomogram had an area of under curve (AUC) value of 0.91 for training set, 0.93 
for cross-sectional validation set, and 0.91 for longitudinal validation set. 
Over the 8-year follow-up, the high-risk group exhibited faster cognitive 
decline (p< 0.001) and a higher risk of developing Alzheimer's dementia (HR= 
6.21, 95% CI= 3.61-10.66, p< 0.001 ).
CONCLUSION: APOE ε4 status, brain reserve capability, neuroinflammatory marker, 
and neuropsychological scores can help predict cognitive decline in non-demented 
adults with high burden of tau pathology, independent of the presence of amyloid 
pathology.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2024.82
PMID: 39044502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


324. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33182. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033182. Epub 2012 Mar 22.

Predicting future clinical changes of MCI patients using longitudinal and 
multimodal biomarkers.

Zhang D(1), Shen D; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Research Imaging Center-BRIC, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United 
States of America.

Accurate prediction of clinical changes of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
patients, including both qualitative change (i.e., conversion to Alzheimer's 
disease (AD)) and quantitative change (i.e., cognitive scores) at future time 
points, is important for early diagnosis of AD and for monitoring the disease 
progression. In this paper, we propose to predict future clinical changes of MCI 
patients by using both baseline and longitudinal multimodality data. To do this, 
we first develop a longitudinal feature selection method to jointly select brain 
regions across multiple time points for each modality. Specifically, for each 
time point, we train a sparse linear regression model by using the imaging data 
and the corresponding clinical scores, with an extra 'group regularization' to 
group the weights corresponding to the same brain region across multiple time 
points together and to allow for selection of brain regions based on the 
strength of multiple time points jointly. Then, to further reflect the 
longitudinal changes on the selected brain regions, we extract a set of 
longitudinal features from the original baseline and longitudinal data. Finally, 
we combine all features on the selected brain regions, from different 
modalities, for prediction by using our previously proposed multi-kernel SVM. We 
validate our method on 88 ADNI MCI subjects, with both MRI and FDG-PET data and 
the corresponding clinical scores (i.e., MMSE and ADAS-Cog) at 5 different time 
points. We first predict the clinical scores (MMSE and ADAS-Cog) at 24-month by 
using the multimodality data at previous time points, and then predict the 
conversion of MCI to AD by using the multimodality data at time points which are 
at least 6-month ahead of the conversion. The results on both sets of 
experiments show that our proposed method can achieve better performance in 
predicting future clinical changes of MCI patients than the conventional 
methods.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033182
PMCID: PMC3310854
PMID: 22457741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


325. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2020 Sep 9;6(1):e12059. doi: 10.1002/trc2.12059. 
eCollection 2020.

Development of a novel cognitive composite outcome to assess therapeutic effects 
of exercise in the EXERT trial for adults with MCI: The ADAS-Cog-Exec.

Jacobs DM(1)(2)(3), Thomas RG(2)(4), Salmon DP(1)(2)(3), Jin S(2)(4), Feldman 
HH(1)(2)(3), Cotman CW(5), Baker LD(6); Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study 
EXERT Study Group; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences University of California San Diego La Jolla 
California USA.
(2)Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study University of California San Diego La 
Jolla California.
(3)Shiley-Marcos Alzheimer's Disease Research Center University of California 
San Diego La Jolla California USA.
(4)Division of Biostatistics Department of Family Medicine & Public Health 
University of California San Diego La Jolla California USA.
(5)Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders University of 
California Irvine Irvine California USA.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine-Geriatrics Wake Forest School of Medicine 
Winston-Salem North Carolina USA.

INTRODUCTION: Use of cognitive composites as primary outcome measures is 
increasingly common in clinical trials of preclinical and prodromal Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). Composite outcomes can decrease intra-individual variability, 
resulting in improved sensitivity to detect longitudinal change and increased 
statistical power. We developed a novel composite outcome, the ADAS-Cog-Exec, 
for use in the EXERT trial-a Phase 3 randomized, controlled, 12-month exercise 
intervention in mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: Three combinations of cognitive measures selected from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale version 13 (ADAS-Cog13), tests of 
executive function, and the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) were created based on 
previously documented sensitivity to longitudinal change in MCI and to the 
effects of exercise. Optimally weighted composites of each combination were 
modeled using data from the ADNI-1 MCI cohort. Ten-fold cross-validation was 
performed to obtain a bias-corrected mean to standard deviation ratio (MSDR). 
The cognitive composites were assessed for their sensitivity to detect 12-month 
change in MCI.
RESULTS: The MSDR of 12-month change for each of the composite outcomes tested 
exceeded that of the ADAS-Cog13 total score. The composite with the highest MSDR 
(MSDR = 0.48) and associated statistical power included scores on ADAS-Cog13 
Word Recall, Delayed Word Recall, Orientation, and Number Cancellation subtests; 
Trail-Making Tests A & B, Digit Symbol Substitution and Category Fluency; and 
cognitive components of the CDR (Memory, Orientation, Judgement & Problem 
Solving).
DISCUSSION: An optimally weighted cognitive composite measure was identified and 
validated for use in EXERT. This composite contained selected subtests from the 
ADAS-Cog13, additional measures of executive function, and box scores for 
cognitive components of the CDR. Because this composite score demonstrated high 
sensitivity to longitudinal change in MCI it will be used as the primary outcome 
measure for the EXERT trial.

© 2020 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical 
Interventions published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's 
Association.

DOI: 10.1002/trc2.12059
PMCID: PMC7507362
PMID: 32995469

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
report. HHF reports grants to UC San Diego from Toyama Pharmaceuticals, Biohaven 
Pharmaceuticals, Annovis (QR Pharma), AC Immune, and Vivoryon (Probiodrug); 
service agreements through UC San Diego for consulting with Novo Nordisk, Eisai 
Pharmaceuticals, Merck Pharmaceuticals, Tau RX, Samus Therapeutics, Arkuda 
Therapeutics, Samumed, and Axon Neurosciences; agreements with Roche/Genentech 
Pharmaceuticals for DMC and DSMB activities and with Tau Consortium for 
Scientific Advisory Board; travel expenses from ADDF, Samus, Samumed, Axon, and 
Novo Nordisk; and speaker fees to UC San Diego from Optum Health and Medscape. 
DPS was a paid consultant for Aptinx, Inc. and Biogen, Inc.


326. Neuroimage. 2009 Feb 15;44(4):1415-22. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.10.031. 
Epub 2008 Nov 5.

Baseline and longitudinal patterns of brain atrophy in MCI patients, and their 
use in prediction of short-term conversion to AD: results from ADNI.

Misra C(1), Fan Y, Davatzikos C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Section of Biomedical Image Analysis, University of 
Pennsylvania, School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

High-dimensional pattern classification was applied to baseline and multiple 
follow-up MRI scans of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
participants with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), in order to investigate the 
potential of predicting short-term conversion to Alzheimer's Disease (AD) on an 
individual basis. MCI participants that converted to AD (average follow-up 15 
months) displayed significantly lower volumes in a number of grey matter (GM) 
regions, as well as in the white matter (WM). They also displayed more 
pronounced periventricular small-vessel pathology, as well as an increased rate 
of increase of such pathology. Individual person analysis was performed using a 
pattern classifier previously constructed from AD patients and cognitively 
normal (CN) individuals to yield an abnormality score that is positive for 
AD-like brains and negative otherwise. The abnormality scores measured from MCI 
non-converters (MCI-NC) followed a bimodal distribution, reflecting the 
heterogeneity of this group, whereas they were positive in almost all MCI 
converters (MCI-C), indicating extensive patterns of AD-like brain atrophy in 
almost all MCI-C. Both MCI subgroups had similar MMSE scores at baseline. A more 
specialized classifier constructed to differentiate converters from 
non-converters based on their baseline scans provided good classification 
accuracy reaching 81.5%, evaluated via cross-validation. These pattern 
classification schemes, which distill spatial patterns of atrophy to a single 
abnormality score, offer promise as biomarkers of AD and as predictors of 
subsequent clinical progression, on an individual patient basis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.10.031
PMCID: PMC2648825
PMID: 19027862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Cerebellum. 2020 Apr;19(2):217-225. doi: 10.1007/s12311-019-01099-1.

Cerebellar Volume Is Associated with Cognitive Decline in Mild Cognitive 
Impairment: Results from ADNI.

Lin CY(1)(2), Chen CH(3), Tom SE(1)(4), Kuo SH(5)(6); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, 650 West 168th 
Street, Room 305, New York, NY, 10032, USA.
(2)Initiative for Columbia Ataxia and Tremor, Columbia University Medical 
Center, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Center for Multimodal Imaging and Genetics, Department of Radiology, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, 650 West 168th 
Street, Room 305, New York, NY, 10032, USA. sk3295@cumc.columbia.edu.
(6)Initiative for Columbia Ataxia and Tremor, Columbia University Medical 
Center, New York, NY, USA. sk3295@cumc.columbia.edu.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a disease with dysfunctional brain network. Previous 
studies found the cerebellar volume changes over the course of AD disease 
progression; however, whether cerebellar volume change contributes to the 
cognitive decline in AD, or its earlier disease stage (i.e., mild cognitive 
impairment [MCI]) remains unclear. In ADNI, cognitive function was assessed 
using Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Behavior section 
(ADAS-Cog). We used linear regression and linear mixed effects models to examine 
whether cerebellar volume is associated with either baseline cognition or with 
cognitive changes over time in MCI or in AD. We used logistic regression to 
assess the relationship between cerebellar volume and disease progression to MCI 
and AD. We found that cerebellar volume is associated with cognition in patients 
with MCI, after adjusting for age, gender, education, hippocampal volume, and 
APOE4 status. Consistently, cerebellar volume is associated with increased odds 
of the disease stages of MCI and AD when compared to controls. However, 
cerebellar volume is not associated with cognitive changes over time in either 
MCI or AD. In summary, cerebellar volume may contribute to cognition level in 
MCI, but not in AD, indicating that the cerebellar network might modulate the 
cognitive function in the early stage of the disease. The cerebellum may be a 
potential target for neuromodulation in treating MCI.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-019-01099-1
PMCID: PMC7085462
PMID: 31900856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors report no conflicts of 
interest.


328. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 24;6(2):e16616. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016616.

Meta-analysis for genome-wide association study identifies multiple variants at 
the BIN1 locus associated with late-onset Alzheimer's disease.

Hu X(1), Pickering E, Liu YC, Hall S, Fournier H, Katz E, Dechairo B, John S, 
Van Eerdewegh P, Soares H; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine, Pfizer Inc., Groton, Connecticut, United States of 
America. xiaolan.hu@pfizer.com

Recent GWAS studies focused on uncovering novel genetic loci related to AD have 
revealed associations with variants near CLU, CR1, PICALM and BIN1. In this 
study, we conducted a genome-wide association study in an independent set of 
1034 cases and 1186 controls using the Illumina genotyping platforms. By 
coupling our data with available GWAS datasets from the ADNI and GenADA, we 
replicated the original associations in both PICALM (rs3851179) and CR1 
(rs3818361). The PICALM variant seems to be non-significant after we adjusted 
for APOE e4 status. We further tested our top markers in 751 independent cases 
and 751 matched controls. Besides the markers close to the APOE locus, a marker 
(rs12989701) upstream of BIN1 locus was replicated and the combined analysis 
reached genome-wide significance level (p = 5E-08). We combined our data with 
the published Harold et al. study and meta-analysis with all available 6521 
cases and 10360 controls at the BIN1 locus revealed two significant variants 
(rs12989701, p = 1.32E-10 and rs744373, p = 3.16E-10) in limited linkage 
disequilibrium (r²  =  0.05) with each other. The independent contribution of 
both SNPs was supported by haplotype conditional analysis. We also conducted 
multivariate analysis in canonical pathways and identified a consistent signal 
in the downstream pathways targeted by Gleevec (P = 0.004 in Pfizer; P = 0.028 
in ADNI and P = 0.04 in GenADA). We further tested variants in CLU, PICALM, BIN1 
and CR1 for association with disease progression in 597 AD patients where 
longitudinal cognitive measures are sufficient. Both the PICALM and CLU variants 
showed nominal significant association with cognitive decline as measured by 
change in Clinical Dementia Rating-sum of boxes (CDR-SB) score from the baseline 
but did not pass multiple-test correction. Future experiments will help us 
better understand potential roles of these genetic loci in AD pathology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016616
PMCID: PMC3044719
PMID: 21390209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors are/were 
employees of Pfizer or Genizon Biosciences. This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to all the Plos One policies on sharing data and materials.


329. Neuroimage. 2009 Dec;48(4):668-81. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.07.011. Epub 
2009 Jul 14.

Optimizing power to track brain degeneration in Alzheimer's disease and mild 
cognitive impairment with tensor-based morphometry: an ADNI study of 515 
subjects.

Hua X(1), Lee S, Yanovsky I, Leow AD, Chou YY, Ho AJ, Gutman B, Toga AW, Jack CR 
Jr, Bernstein MA, Reiman EM, Harvey DJ, Kornak J, Schuff N, Alexander GE, Weiner 
MW, Thompson PM; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Department of Neurology, UCLA School of 
Medicine, Neuroscience Research Building 225E, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1769, USA.

Tensor-based morphometry (TBM) is a powerful method to map the 3D profile of 
brain degeneration in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI). We optimized a TBM-based image analysis method to determine what 
methodological factors, and which image-derived measures, maximize statistical 
power to track brain change. 3D maps, tracking rates of structural atrophy over 
time, were created from 1030 longitudinal brain MRI scans (1-year follow-up) of 
104 AD patients (age: 75.7+/-7.2 years; MMSE: 23.3+/-1.8, at baseline), 254 
amnestic MCI subjects (75.0+/-7.2 years; 27.0+/-1.8), and 157 healthy elderly 
subjects (75.9+/-5.1 years; 29.1+/-1.0), as part of the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). To determine which TBM designs gave greatest 
statistical power, we compared different linear and nonlinear registration 
parameters (including different regularization functions), and different 
numerical summary measures derived from the maps. Detection power was greatly 
enhanced by summarizing changes in a statistically-defined region-of-interest 
(ROI) derived from an independent training sample of 22 AD patients. Effect 
sizes were compared using cumulative distribution function (CDF) plots and false 
discovery rate methods. In power analyses, the best method required only 48 AD 
and 88 MCI subjects to give 80% power to detect a 25% reduction in the mean 
annual change using a two-sided test (at alpha=0.05). This is a drastic sample 
size reduction relative to using clinical scores as outcome measures (619 
AD/6797 MCI for the ADAS-Cog, and 408 AD/796 MCI for the Clinical Dementia 
Rating sum-of-boxes scores). TBM offers high statistical power to track brain 
changes in large, multi-site neuroimaging studies and clinical trials of AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.07.011
PMCID: PMC2971697
PMID: 19615450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Neuroinformatics. 2020 Jun;18(3):429-449. doi: 10.1007/s12021-019-09439-6.

Automated White Matter Hyperintensity Segmentation Using Bayesian Model 
Selection: Assessment and Correlations with Cognitive Change.

Fiford CM(1), Sudre CH(2)(3)(4), Pemberton H(2), Walsh P(2), Manning E(2), 
Malone IB(2), Nicholas J(5), Bouvy WH(6), Carmichael OT(7), Biessels GJ(6), 
Cardoso MJ(2)(3)(4), Barnes J(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Dementia Research Centre, Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Queen 
Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK. cassidy.fiford.10@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Dementia Research Centre, Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Queen 
Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(3)School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(4)Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, University College 
London, London, UK.
(5)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(6)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(7)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge, LA, USA.

Accurate, automated white matter hyperintensity (WMH) segmentations are needed 
for large-scale studies to understand contributions of WMH to neurological 
diseases. We evaluated Bayesian Model Selection (BaMoS), a hierarchical 
fully-unsupervised model selection framework for WMH segmentation. We compared 
BaMoS segmentations to semi-automated segmentations, and assessed whether they 
predicted longitudinal cognitive change in control, early Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (EMCI), late Mild Cognitive Impairment (LMCI), subjective/significant 
memory concern (SMC) and Alzheimer's (AD) participants. Data were downloaded 
from the Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Magnetic resonance 
images from 30 control and 30 AD participants were selected to incorporate 
multiple scanners, and were semi-automatically segmented by 4 raters and BaMoS. 
Segmentations were assessed using volume correlation, Dice score, and other 
spatial metrics. Linear mixed-effect models were fitted to 180 control, 107 SMC, 
320 EMCI, 171 LMCI and 151 AD participants separately in each group, with the 
outcomes being cognitive change (e.g. mini-mental state examination; MMSE), and 
BaMoS WMH, age, sex, race and education used as predictors. There was a high 
level of agreement between BaMoS' WMH segmentation volumes and a consensus of 
rater segmentations, with a median Dice score of 0.74 and correlation 
coefficient of 0.96. BaMoS WMH predicted cognitive change in: control, EMCI, and 
SMC groups using MMSE; LMCI using clinical dementia rating scale; and EMCI using 
Alzheimer's disease assessment scale-cognitive subscale (p < 0.05, all tests). 
BaMoS compares well to semi-automated segmentation, is robust to different WMH 
loads and scanners, and can generate volumes which predict decline. BaMoS can be 
applicable to further large-scale studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s12021-019-09439-6
PMCID: PMC7338814
PMID: 32062817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Hippocampus. 2017 Jun;27(6):653-667. doi: 10.1002/hipo.22721. Epub 2017 Apr 10.

The interactive effect of demographic and clinical factors on hippocampal 
volume: A multicohort study on 1958 cognitively normal individuals.

Ferreira D(1), Hansson O(2), Barroso J(3), Molina Y(3)(4), Machado A(3), 
Hernández-Cabrera JA(3), Muehlboeck JS(1), Stomrud E(2), Nägga K(2), Lindberg 
O(1)(2), Ames D(5)(6), Kalpouzos G(7), Fratiglioni L(7)(8), Bäckman L(7)(8), 
Graff C(9)(10), Mecocci P(11), Vellas B(12), Tsolaki M(13), Kłoszewska I(14), 
Soininen H(15), Lovestone S(16), Ahlström H(17), Lind L(18), Larsson EM(17), 
Wahlund LO(1), Simmons A(1)(19)(20)(21), Westman E(1)(21); the AddNeuroMed 
consortium, for the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI); 
Australian Imaging Biomarkers and Lifestyle Study of Ageing (AIBL) research 
group.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Geriatrics, Centre for Alzheimer Research, Department of 
Neurobiology Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 14157, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, Clinical Memory Research Unit, Lund 
University, Malmö, 20502, Sweden.
(3)Department of Clinical Psychology, Psychobiology and Methodology, University 
of La Laguna, La Laguna, 38071, Spain.
(4)Faculty of Health Sciences, University Fernando Pessoa Canarias, Las Palmas 
de Gran Canaria, Spain.
(5)National Ageing Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, 3050, Australia.
(6)University of Melbourne Academic Unit for Psychiatry of Old Age, St George's 
Hospital, Kew, Victoria, 3101, Australia.
(7)Aging Research Center (ARC), Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and 
Society, Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm University, 113 30, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(8)Stockholm Gerontology Research Centre, Stockholm, 11330, Sweden.
(9)Division of Neurogeriatrics, Department of Neurobiology Care Sciences and 
Society, Centre for Alzheimer Research, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 14157, 
Sweden.
(10)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, 
Stockholm, 14186, Sweden.
(11)Institute of Gerontology and Geriatrics, University of Perugia, Perugia, 
06100, Italy.
(12)INSERM U 558, University of Toulouse, Toulouse, 31024, France.
(13)3rd Department of Neurology, Aristoteleion Panepistimeion Thessalonikis, 
Thessaloniki, 54124, Greece.
(14)Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, 92216, Poland.
(15)University of Eastern Finland and Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, 70211, 
Finland.
(16)Department of Psychiatry, Warneford Hospital University of Oxford, Oxford, 
OX37JX, United Kingdom.
(17)Department of Surgical Sciences, Radiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
75185, Sweden.
(18)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 75185, Sweden.
(19)NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health, London, SE58AF, United 
Kingdom.
(20)NIHR Biomedical Research Unit for Dementia, London, SE58AF, United Kingdom.
(21)Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, SE58AF, United 
Kingdom.

Alzheimer's disease is characterized by hippocampal atrophy. Other factors also 
influence the hippocampal volume, but their interactive effect has not been 
investigated before in cognitively healthy individuals. The aim of this study is 
to evaluate the interactive effect of key demographic and clinical factors on 
hippocampal volume, in contrast to previous studies frequently investigating 
these factors in a separate manner. Also, to investigate how comparable the 
control groups from ADNI, AIBL, and AddNeuroMed are with five population-based 
cohorts. In this study, 1958 participants were included (100 AddNeuroMed, 226 
ADNI, 155 AIBL, 59 BRC, 295 GENIC, 279 BioFiNDER, 398 PIVUS, and 446 SNAC-K). 
ANOVA and random forest were used for testing between-cohort differences in 
demographic-clinical variables. Multiple regression was used to study the 
influence of demographic-clinical variables on hippocampal volume. ANCOVA was 
used to analyze whether between-cohort differences in demographic-clinical 
variables explained between-cohort differences in hippocampal volume. Age and 
global brain atrophy were the most important variables in explaining variability 
in hippocampal volume. These variables were not only important themselves but 
also in interaction with gender, education, MMSE, and total intracranial volume. 
AddNeuroMed, ADNI, and AIBL differed from the population-based cohorts in 
several demographic-clinical variables that had a significant effect on 
hippocampal volume. Variability in hippocampal volume in individuals with normal 
cognition is high. Differences that previously tended to be related to disease 
mechanisms could also be partly explained by demographic and clinical factors 
independent from the disease. Furthermore, cognitively normal individuals 
especially from ADNI and AIBL are not representative of the general population. 
These findings may have important implications for future research and clinical 
trials, translating imaging biomarkers to the general population, and validating 
current diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer's disease and predementia stages.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hipo.22721
PMID: 28394034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Neuroimage. 2008 Nov 15;43(3):458-69. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.07.013. 
Epub 2008 Jul 22.

Tensor-based morphometry as a neuroimaging biomarker for Alzheimer's disease: an 
MRI study of 676 AD, MCI, and normal subjects.

Hua X(1), Leow AD, Parikshak N, Lee S, Chiang MC, Toga AW, Jack CR Jr, Weiner 
MW, Thompson PM; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Department of Neurology, UCLA School of 
Medicine, Neuroscience Research Building 225E, 635 Charles Young Drive, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095-1769, USA.

In one of the largest brain MRI studies to date, we used tensor-based 
morphometry (TBM) to create 3D maps of structural atrophy in 676 subjects with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and healthy elderly 
controls, scanned as part of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI). Using inverse-consistent 3D non-linear elastic image registration, we 
warped 676 individual brain MRI volumes to a population mean geometric template. 
Jacobian determinant maps were created, revealing the 3D profile of local 
volumetric expansion and compression. We compared the anatomical distribution of 
atrophy in 165 AD patients (age: 75.6+/-7.6 years), 330 MCI subjects 
(74.8+/-7.5), and 181 controls (75.9+/-5.1). Brain atrophy in selected 
regions-of-interest was correlated with clinical measurements--the sum-of-boxes 
clinical dementia rating (CDR-SB), mini-mental state examination (MMSE), and the 
logical memory test scores - at voxel level followed by correction for multiple 
comparisons. Baseline temporal lobe atrophy correlated with current cognitive 
performance, future cognitive decline, and conversion from MCI to AD over the 
following year; it predicted future decline even in healthy subjects. Over half 
of the AD and MCI subjects carried the ApoE4 (apolipoprotein E4) gene, which 
increases risk for AD; they showed greater hippocampal and temporal lobe 
deficits than non-carriers. ApoE2 gene carriers--1/6 of the normal group--showed 
reduced ventricular expansion, suggesting a protective effect. As an automated 
image analysis technique, TBM reveals 3D correlations between neuroimaging 
markers, genes, and future clinical changes, and is highly efficient for 
large-scale MRI studies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.07.013
PMCID: PMC3197851
PMID: 18691658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Brain. 2009 May;132(Pt 5):1355-65. doi: 10.1093/brain/awp062. Epub 2009 Mar 31.

Serial PIB and MRI in normal, mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: 
implications for sequence of pathological events in Alzheimer's disease.

Jack CR Jr(1), Lowe VJ, Weigand SD, Wiste HJ, Senjem ML, Knopman DS, Shiung MM, 
Gunter JL, Boeve BF, Kemp BJ, Weiner M, Petersen RC; Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner M, Thal L, Weiner M, Thal L, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki J, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Gamst A, Potter WZ, Green 
RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Thal L, Jack CR Jr, Anders D, Bernstein M, Felmlee J, 
Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, Alexander G, Jagust W, Bandy D, Koeppe RA, Foster 
N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Trojanowki J, Shaw L, Lee VM, Korecka M, Toga AW, Crawford 
K, Neu S, Beckett L, Harvey D, Gamst A, Kornak J, Kachaturian Z, Frank R, Snyder 
PJ, Molchan S, Kaye J, Vorobik R, Quinn J, Schneider L, Pawluczyk S, Spann B, 
Fleisher AS, Vanderswag H, Heidebrink JL, Lord JL, Petersen R, Johnson K, Doody 
RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Chowdhury M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Morris JC, 
Mintun MA, Schneider S, Marson D, Griffith R, Badger B, Grossman H, Tang C, 
Stern J, deToledo-Morrell L, Shah RC, Bach J, Duara R, Isaacson R, Strauman S, 
Albert MS, Pedroso J, Toroney J, Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, De Santi SM, Doraiswamy 
PM, Petrella JR, Aiello M, Clark CM, Pham C, Nunez J, Smith CD, Given CA 2nd, 
Hardy P, DeKosky ST, Oakley M, Simpson DM, Ismail MS, Porsteinsson A, McCallum 
C, Cramer SC, Mulnard RA, McAdams-Ortiz C, Diaz-Arrastia R, Martin-Cook K, 
DeVous M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Anderson HS, Laubinger MM, 
Bartzokis G, Silverman DH, Lu PH, Fletcher R, Parfitt F, Johnson H, Farlow M, 
Herring S, Hake AM, van Dyck CH, MacAvoy MG, Bifano LA, Chertkow H, Bergman H, 
Hosein C, Black S, Graham S, Caldwell C, Feldman H, Assaly M, Hsiung GY, Kertesz 
A, Rogers J, Trost D, Bernick C, Gitelman D, Johnson N, Mesulam M, Sadowsky C, 
Villena T, Mesner S, Aisen PS, Johnson KB, Behan KE, Sperling RA, Rentz DM, 
Johnson KA, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Ashford W, Sabbagh M, Connor D, Obradov S, 
Green RC, Killiany R, Norbash A, Obisesan TO, Jayam-Trouth A, Wang P, Auchus AP, 
Huang J, Friedland RP, DeCarli C, Fletcher E, Carmichael O, Kittur S, Mirje S, 
Johnson SC, Borrie M, Lee TY, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Highum D, Preda 
A, Nguyen D, Tariot PN, Reiman EM, Hendin BA, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Beversdorf 
DQ, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, Brown AD, Gandy S, Marenberg ME, Rovner BW, 
Pearlson G, Blank K, Anderson K, Saykin AJ, Santulli RB, Pare N, Williamson JD, 
Sink KM, Potter H, Raj BA, Giordano A, Ott BR, Wu CK, Cohen R, Wilks KL, 
Safirstein BE.

Author information:
(1)Clifford R. Jack, Mayo Clinic, Diagnostic Radiology, 200 First Street SW, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA. jack.clifford@mayo.edu.

The purpose of this study was to use serial imaging to gain insight into the 
sequence of pathologic events in Alzheimer's disease, and the clinical features 
associated with this sequence. We measured change in amyloid deposition over 
time using serial (11)C Pittsburgh compound B (PIB) positron emission tomography 
and progression of neurodegeneration using serial structural magnetic resonance 
imaging. We studied 21 healthy cognitively normal subjects, 32 with amnestic 
mild cognitive impairment and 8 with Alzheimer's disease. Subjects were drawn 
from two sources--ongoing longitudinal registries at Mayo Clinic, and the 
Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). All subjects underwent 
clinical assessments, MRI and PIB studies at two time points, approximately one 
year apart. PIB retention was quantified in global cortical to cerebellar ratio 
units and brain atrophy in units of cm(3) by measuring ventricular expansion. 
The annual change in global PIB retention did not differ by clinical group (P = 
0.90), and although small (median 0.042 ratio units/year overall) was greater 
than zero among all subjects (P < 0.001). Ventricular expansion rates differed 
by clinical group (P < 0.001) and increased in the following order: cognitively 
normal (1.3 cm(3)/year) < amnestic mild cognitive impairment (2.5 cm(3)/year) < 
Alzheimer's disease (7.7 cm(3)/year). Among all subjects there was no 
correlation between PIB change and concurrent change on CDR-SB (r = -0.01, P = 
0.97) but some evidence of a weak correlation with MMSE (r =-0.22, P = 0.09). In 
contrast, greater rates of ventricular expansion were clearly correlated with 
worsening concurrent change on CDR-SB (r = 0.42, P < 0.01) and MMSE (r =-0.52, P 
< 0.01). Our data are consistent with a model of typical late onset Alzheimer's 
disease that has two main features: (i) dissociation between the rate of amyloid 
deposition and the rate of neurodegeneration late in life, with amyloid 
deposition proceeding at a constant slow rate while neurodegeneration 
accelerates and (ii) clinical symptoms are coupled to neurodegeneration not 
amyloid deposition. Significant plaque deposition occurs prior to clinical 
decline. The presence of brain amyloidosis alone is not sufficient to produce 
cognitive decline, rather, the neurodegenerative component of Alzheimer's 
disease pathology is the direct substrate of cognitive impairment and the rate 
of cognitive decline is driven by the rate of neurodegeneration. 
Neurodegeneration (atrophy on MRI) both precedes and parallels cognitive 
decline. This model implies a complimentary role for MRI and PIB imaging in 
Alzheimer's disease, with each reflecting one of the major pathologies, amyloid 
dysmetabolism and neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awp062
PMCID: PMC2677798
PMID: 19339253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Radiology. 2013 Feb;266(2):583-91. doi: 10.1148/radiol.12120010. Epub 2012 Dec 
11.

Predicting cognitive decline in subjects at risk for Alzheimer disease by using 
combined cerebrospinal fluid, MR imaging, and PET biomarkers.

Shaffer JL(1), Petrella JR, Sheldon FC, Choudhury KR, Calhoun VD, Coleman RE, 
Doraiswamy PM; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Duke University Medical Center, 2301 Erwin Rd, Box 
3808, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Comment in
    Rofo. 2013 Jul;185(7):604-5. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1319579.

PURPOSE: To assess the extent to which multiple Alzheimer disease (AD) 
biomarkers improve the ability to predict future decline in subjects with mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) compared with predictions based on clinical 
parameters alone.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: All protocols were approved by the institutional review 
board at each site, and written informed consent was obtained from all subjects. 
The study was HIPAA compliant. Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) baseline magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and fluorine 18 
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) studies for 97 
subjects with MCI were used. MR imaging-derived gray matter probability maps and 
FDG PET images were analyzed by using independent component analysis, an 
unbiased data-driven method to extract independent sources of information from 
whole-brain data. The loading parameters for all MR imaging and FDG components, 
along with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteins, were entered into logistic 
regression models (dependent variable: conversion to AD within 4 years). Eight 
models were considered, including all combinations of MR imaging, PET, and CSF 
markers with the covariates (age, education, apolipoprotein E genotype, 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive subscale score).
RESULTS: Combining MR imaging, FDG PET, and CSF data with routine clinical tests 
significantly increased the accuracy of predicting conversion to AD compared 
with clinical testing alone. The misclassification rate decreased from 41.3% to 
28.4% (P < .00001). FDG PET contributed more information to routine tests (P < 
.00001) than CSF (P = .32) or MR imaging (P = .08).
CONCLUSION: Imaging and CSF biomarkers can improve prediction of conversion from 
MCI to AD compared with baseline clinical testing. FDG PET appears to add the 
greatest prognostic information.

DOI: 10.1148/radiol.12120010
PMCID: PMC3558874
PMID: 23232293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Healthc Eng. 2019 Jan 29;2019:9507193. doi: 10.1155/2019/9507193. eCollection 
2019.

Cloud-Based Brain Magnetic Resonance Image Segmentation and Parcellation System 
for Individualized Prediction of Cognitive Worsening.

Sakamoto R(1)(2), Marano C(3)(4), Miller MI(5)(6), Lyketsos CG(3), Li Y(6), Mori 
S(1)(6)(7), Oishi K(1), Adni ADNI(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, Kyoto University School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins Bayview and 
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Center for Imaging Science, School or Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(6)AnatomyWorks, LLC, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(7)F. M. Kirby Research Center for Functional Brain Imaging, Kennedy Krieger 
Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(8)Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative Study, USA.

For patients with cognitive disorders and dementia, accurate prognosis of 
cognitive worsening is critical to their ability to prepare for the future, in 
collaboration with health-care providers. Despite multiple efforts to apply 
computational brain magnetic resonance image (MRI) analysis in predicting 
cognitive worsening, with several successes, brain MRI is not routinely 
quantified in clinical settings to guide prognosis and clinical decision-making. 
To encourage the clinical use of a cutting-edge image segmentation method, we 
developed a prediction model as part of an established web-based cloud platform, 
MRICloud. The model was built in a training dataset from Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) where baseline MRI scans were combined with 
clinical data over time. Each MRI was parcellated into 265 anatomical units 
based on the MRICloud fully automated image segmentation function, to measure 
the volume of each parcel. The Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) was used as 
a measure of cognitive function. The normalized volume of 265 parcels, combined 
with baseline MMSE score, age, and sex were input variables for a Least Absolute 
Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) regression analysis, with MMSE change 
in the subsequent two years as the target for prediction. A leave-one-out 
analysis performed on the training dataset estimated a correlation coefficient 
of 0.64 between true and predicted MMSE change. A receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) analysis estimated a sensitivity of 0.88 and a specificity 
of 0.76 in predicting substantial cognitive worsening after two years, defined 
as MMSE decline of ≥4 points. This MRICloud prediction model was then applied to 
a test dataset of clinically acquired MRIs from the Johns Hopkins Memory and 
Alzheimer's Treatment Center (MATC), a clinical care setting. In the latter 
setting, the model had both sensitivity and specificity of 1.0 in predicting 
substantial cognitive worsening. While the MRICloud prediction model 
demonstrated promise as a platform on which computational MRI findings can 
easily be extended to clinical use, further study with a larger number of 
patients is needed for validation.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/9507193
PMCID: PMC6374863
PMID: 30838124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Med Phys. 2024 Jun;51(6):4105-4120. doi: 10.1002/mp.16984. Epub 2024 Feb 19.

An effective and robust lattice Boltzmann model guided by atlas for hippocampal 
subregions segmentation.

Liu Y(1)(2)(3), Wang M(2), Yu X(4), Han Y(4), Jiang J(2), Yan Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Communication and Information Engineering, Shanghai University, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Shanghai 
University, Shanghai, China.
(3)School of Electrical Engineering, Shandong University of Aeronautics, 
Binzhou, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Given the varying vulnerability of the rostral and caudal regions of 
the hippocampus to neuropathology in the Alzheimer's disease (AD) continuum, 
accurately assessing structural changes in these subregions is crucial for early 
AD detection. The development of reliable and robust automatic segmentation 
methods for hippocampal subregions (HS) is of utmost importance.
OBJECTIVE: Our aim is to propose and validate a HS segmentation model that is 
both training-free and highly generalizable. This method should exhibit 
comparable accuracy and efficiency to state-of-the-art techniques. The segmented 
HS can serve as a biomarker for studying the progression of AD.
METHODS: We utilized the functional magnetic resonance imaging of the Brain's 
Integrated Registration and Segmentation Tool (FIRST) to segment the entire 
hippocampus. By intersecting the segmentation results with the Brainnetome (BN) 
atlas, we obtained coarse segmentation of the four HS regions. This coarse 
segmentation was then employed as a shape prior term in the lattice Boltzmann 
(LB) model, as well as for initializing contours. Additionally, image gradients 
and local gray levels were integrated into the external force terms of the LB 
model to refine the coarse segmentation results. We assessed the segmentation 
accuracy of the model using the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) dataset and evaluated the potential of the segmentation results as AD 
biomarkers on both the ADNI and Xuanwu datasets.
RESULTS: The median Dice similarity coefficients (DSC) for the left caudal, 
right caudal, left rostral, and right rostral hippocampus were 0.87, 0.88, 0.88, 
and 0.89, respectively. The proportion of segmentation results with a DSC 
exceeding 0.8 was 77%, 78%, 77%, and 94% for the respective regions. In terms of 
volume, the correlation coefficients between the segmentation results of the 
four HS regions and the gold standard were 0.95, 0.93, 0.96, and 0.96, 
respectively. Regarding asymmetry, the correlation coefficient between the 
segmentation result's right caudal minus left caudal and the corresponding gold 
standard was 0.91, while for right rostral minus left rostral, it was 0.93. Over 
time, we observed a decline in the volumes of the four HS regions and the total 
hippocampal volume of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) converters. Analysis of 
inter-group differences revealed that, except for the right rostral region in 
the ADNI dataset, the p-values for the four HS regions in the normal controls 
(NC), MCI, and AD groups from both datasets were all below 0.05. The right 
caudal hippocampal volume demonstrated correlation coefficients of 0.47 and 0.43 
with the mini-mental state examination (MMSE) and Montreal cognitive assessment 
(MoCA), respectively. Similarly, the left rostral hippocampal volume showed 
correlation coefficients of 0.50 and 0.58 with MMSE and MoCA, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our framework allows for direct application to different brain 
magnetic resonance (MR) datasets without the need for training. It eliminates 
the requirement for complex image preprocessing steps while achieving 
segmentation accuracy comparable to deep learning (DL) methods even with small 
sample sizes. Compared to traditional active contour models (ACM) and 
atlas-based methods, our approach exhibits significant speed advantages. The 
segmented HS regions hold promise as potential biomarkers for studying the 
progression of AD.

© 2024 American Association of Physicists in Medicine.

DOI: 10.1002/mp.16984
PMID: 38373278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Front Aging Neurosci. 2019 Feb 26;11:36. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2019.00036. 
eCollection 2019.

The Relationship Between Hippocampal Volumes and Delayed Recall Is Modified by 
APOE ε4 in Mild Cognitive Impairment.

Wang X(1), Zhou W(2), Ye T(3), Lin X(1), Zhang J(4); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Wenzhou Seventh People's Hospital, Wenzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Ultrasound, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical 
University, Wenzhou, China.
(4)Independent Researcher, Hangzhou, China.

Objective: To investigate whether APOE ε4 affects the association of verbal 
memory with neurodegeneration presented by the hippocampal volume/intracranial 
volume ratio (HpVR). Methods: The study sample included 371 individuals with 
normal cognition (NC), 725 subjects with amnestic mild cognitive impairment 
(aMCI), and 251 patients with mild Alzheimer's disease (AD) from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) who underwent the rey auditory verbal 
learning test (RAVLT). Multiple linear regression models were conducted to 
assess the effect of the APOE ε4∗HpVR interaction on RAVLT in all subjects and 
in each diagnostic group adjusting for age, gender and educational attainment, 
and global cognition. Results: In all subjects, there was no significant APOE ε4 
× HpVR interaction for immediate recall or delayed recall (p > 0.05). However, 
in aMCI subjects, there was a significant APOE ε4 × HpVR interaction for delayed 
recall (p = 0.008), but not immediate recall (p = 0.15). More specifically, the 
detrimental effect of APOE ε4 on delayed recall altered by HpVR such that this 
effect was most evident among subjects with small to moderate HpVR, but this 
disadvantage was absent or even reversed among subjects with larger HpVR. No 
significant interaction was observed in the NC or AD group. Conclusion: These 
findings highlight a potential role of APOE ε4 status in affecting the 
association of hippocampus size with delayed recall memory in the early stage of 
AD.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2019.00036
PMCID: PMC6399520
PMID: 30863302


338. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2017 Jul;23(6):521-527. doi: 10.1017/S1355617717000285. 
Epub 2017 May 10.

Longitudinal Trajectories of Informant-Reported Daily Functioning in Empirically 
Defined Subtypes of Mild Cognitive Impairment.

Thomas KR(1), Edmonds EC(1), Delano-Wood L(1), Bondi MW(1).

Author information:
(1)1Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System,San Diego,California.

OBJECTIVES: Within the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)'s mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) cohort, we previously identified MCI subtypes as well 
as participants initially diagnosed with MCI but found to have normal 
neuropsychological, biomarker, and neuroimaging profiles. We investigated the 
functional change over time in these empirically derived MCI subgroups.
METHODS: ADNI MCI participants (n=654) were classified using cluster analysis as 
Amnestic MCI (single-domain memory impairment), Dysnomic MCI (memory+language 
impairments), Dysexecutive/Mixed MCI (memory+language+attention/executive 
impairments), or Cluster-Derived Normal (CDN). Robust normal control 
participants (NCs; n=284) were also examined. The Functional Activities 
Questionnaire (FAQ) was administered at baseline through 48-month follow-up. 
Multilevel modeling examined FAQ trajectories by cognitive subgroup.
RESULTS: The Dysexecutive/Mixed group demonstrated the fastest rate of decline 
across all groups. Amnestic and Dysnomic groups showed steeper rates of decline 
than CDNs. While CDNs had more functional difficulty than NCs across visits, 
both groups' mean FAQ scores remained below its suggested cutoff at all visits.
CONCLUSIONS: Results (a) show the importance of executive dysfunction in the 
context of other impaired cognitive domains when predicting functional decline 
in at-risk elders, and (b) support our previous work demonstrating that ADNI's 
MCI criteria may have resulted in false-positive MCI diagnoses, given the CDN's 
better FAQ trajectory than those of the cognitively impaired MCI groups. (JINS, 
2017, 23, 521-527).

DOI: 10.1017/S1355617717000285
PMCID: PMC5524519
PMID: 28487004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Neuroimage. 2017 Apr 15;150:23-49. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.01.066. Epub 
2017 Jan 29.

Predictive modelling using neuroimaging data in the presence of confounds.

Rao A(1), Monteiro JM(2), Mourao-Miranda J(3); Alzheimer's Disease Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University College London, United Kingdom; 
Max Planck University College London Centre for Computational Psychiatry and 
Ageing Research, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: a.rao@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Computer Science, University College London, United Kingdom; 
Max Planck University College London Centre for Computational Psychiatry and 
Ageing Research, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: joao.monteiro@ucl.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Computer Science, University College London, United Kingdom; 
Max Planck University College London Centre for Computational Psychiatry and 
Ageing Research, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: j.mourao-miranda@ucl.ac.uk.

When training predictive models from neuroimaging data, we typically have 
available non-imaging variables such as age and gender that affect the imaging 
data but which we may be uninterested in from a clinical perspective. Such 
variables are commonly referred to as 'confounds'. In this work, we firstly give 
a working definition for confound in the context of training predictive models 
from samples of neuroimaging data. We define a confound as a variable which 
affects the imaging data and has an association with the target variable in the 
sample that differs from that in the population-of-interest, i.e., the 
population over which we intend to apply the estimated predictive model. The 
focus of this paper is the scenario in which the confound and target variable 
are independent in the population-of-interest, but the training sample is biased 
due to a sample association between the target and confound. We then discuss 
standard approaches for dealing with confounds in predictive modelling such as 
image adjustment and including the confound as a predictor, before deriving and 
motivating an Instance Weighting scheme that attempts to account for confounds 
by focusing model training so that it is optimal for the population-of-interest. 
We evaluate the standard approaches and Instance Weighting in two regression 
problems with neuroimaging data in which we train models in the presence of 
confounding, and predict samples that are representative of the 
population-of-interest. For comparison, these models are also evaluated when 
there is no confounding present. In the first experiment we predict the MMSE 
score using structural MRI from the ADNI database with gender as the confound, 
while in the second we predict age using structural MRI from the IXI database 
with acquisition site as the confound. Considered over both datasets we find 
that none of the methods for dealing with confounding gives more accurate 
predictions than a baseline model which ignores confounding, although including 
the confound as a predictor gives models that are less accurate than the 
baseline model. We do find, however, that different methods appear to focus 
their predictions on specific subsets of the population-of-interest, and that 
predictive accuracy is greater when there is no confounding present. We conclude 
with a discussion comparing the advantages and disadvantages of each approach, 
and the implications of our evaluation for building predictive models that can 
be used in clinical practice.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.01.066
PMCID: PMC5391990
PMID: 28143776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Affect Disord. 2024 Dec 15;367:640-646. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2024.09.018. Epub 
2024 Sep 7.

Hippocampal volume maximally modulates the relationship between subsyndromal 
symptomatic depression and cognitive impairment in non-demented older adults.

Jing C(1), Kong M(2), Ng KP(3), Xu L(1), Ma G(4), Ba M(5); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, the Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of 
Qingdao University, Shandong 264000, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Yantaishan Hospital, Yantai City, Shandong 264000, 
China.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore, 
Singapore; Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Department of Neurology, East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai 200120, China. Electronic address: maguozhao@163.com.
(5)Department of Neurology, the Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of 
Qingdao University, Shandong 264000, China; Yantai Regional Sub Center of 
National Center for Clinical Medical Research of Neurological Diseases, 
Shandong, China; Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Neuroimmune Interaction 
and Regulation, China. Electronic address: bamaowen@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Subsyndromal symptomatic depression (SSD) is associated with an 
elevated risk of cognitive impairment in non-demented older adults. Given that 
hippocampal and middle temporal gyrus atrophy have been shown to cause SSD, our 
study aimed to investigate the effect of hippocampal volume on the association 
between SSD and cognitive impairment.
METHODS: 338 non-demented older adults from the ADNI (Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative) cohort who underwent cognitive assessments, 
questionnaires on depressive symptoms and MRI brain were studied. SSD group is 
defined as a score of 1-5 based on Geriatric Depression Scale scores. We 
conducted causal mediation analyses to investigate the effect of hippocampal 
volume on cognitive performance cross-sectionally.
RESULTS: The SSD group displayed lower left and right hippocampal volume 
(p<0.01) than the non-SSD group. SSD was linked to poorer cognition and smaller 
hippocampal volume. We found that hippocampal volume partially mediated the 
effect of SSD on cognitive performance including the global cognition and the 
cognitive section of Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale, with mediation 
percentages ranging from 6.45 % to 30.46 %. In addition, we found that the 
thickness of the left middle temporal, right entorhinal and right fusiform 
gyrus, brain regions linked to AD, mediate the relationship between SSD and 
cognition with mediation percentages ranging from 8.67 % to 21.44 %.
LIMITATIONS: Our article didn't differentiate between mild cognitive impairment 
and normal population.
CONCLUSION: The associations of SSD and cognitive impairment are linked to 
alterations in Alzheimer's Disease related brain regions.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2024.09.018
PMID: 39245222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare they have no competing interests.


341. Neurobiol Aging. 2015 Jan;36 Suppl 1:S178-84. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.03.043. Epub 2014 Oct 17.

A computational method for computing an Alzheimer's disease progression score; 
experiments and validation with the ADNI data set.

Jedynak BM(1), Liu B(2), Lang A(3), Gel Y(4), Prince JL(3); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA; Center for Imaging Science, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA; Laboratoire de Mathématiques Paul Painlevé, Université des 
Sciences et Technologies de Lille, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France. Electronic 
address: bruno.jedynak@jhu.edu.
(2)Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA; Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, University 
of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.

Understanding the time-dependent changes of biomarkers related to Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) is a key to assessing disease progression and measuring the 
outcomes of disease-modifying therapies. In this article, we validate an AD 
progression score model which uses multiple biomarkers to quantify the AD 
progression of subjects following 3 assumptions: (1) there is a unique disease 
progression for all subjects; (2) each subject has a different age of onset and 
rate of progression; and (3) each biomarker is sigmoidal as a function of 
disease progression. Fitting the parameters of this model is a challenging 
problem which we approach using an alternating least squares optimization 
algorithm. To validate this optimization scheme under realistic conditions, we 
use the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative cohort. With the help of 
Monte Carlo simulations, we show that most of the global parameters of the model 
are tightly estimated, thus enabling an ordering of the biomarkers that fit the 
model well, ordered as: the Rey auditory verbal learning test with 30 minutes 
delay, the sum of the 2 lateral hippocampal volumes divided by the intracranial 
volume, followed (by the clinical dementia rating sum of boxes score and the 
mini-mental state examination score) in no particular order and at last the AD 
assessment scale-cognitive subscale.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.03.043
PMCID: PMC4267989
PMID: 25444605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Front Neurosci. 2024 Aug 7;18:1440653. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2024.1440653. 
eCollection 2024.

Exploring white matter microstructural alterations in mild cognitive impairment: 
a multimodal diffusion MRI investigation utilizing diffusion kurtosis and 
free-water imaging.

Nelson MR(1)(2), Keeling EG(1)(2), Stokes AM(1), Bergamino M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuroimaging Research, Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, 
AZ, United States.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United States.

BACKGROUND: Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) is a transitional stage from normal 
aging to dementia, characterized by noticeable changes in cognitive function 
that do not significantly impact daily life. Diffusion MRI (dMRI) plays a 
crucial role in understanding MCI by assessing white matter integrity and 
revealing early signs of axonal degeneration and myelin breakdown before 
cognitive symptoms appear.
METHODS: This study utilized the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) database to compare white matter microstructure in individuals with MCI 
to cognitively normal (CN) individuals, employing advanced dMRI techniques such 
as diffusion kurtosis imaging (DKI), mean signal diffusion kurtosis imaging 
(MSDKI), and free water imaging (FWI).
RESULTS: Analyzing data from 55 CN subjects and 46 individuals with MCI, this 
study found significant differences in white matter integrity, particularly in 
free water levels and kurtosis values, suggesting neuroinflammatory responses 
and microstructural integrity disruption in MCI. Moreover, negative correlations 
between Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores and free water levels in the 
brain within the MCI group point to the potential of these measures as early 
biomarkers for cognitive impairment.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, this study demonstrates how a multimodal advanced 
diffusion imaging approach can uncover early microstructural changes in MCI, 
offering insights into the neurobiological mechanisms behind cognitive decline.

Copyright © 2024 Nelson, Keeling, Stokes and Bergamino.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2024.1440653
PMCID: PMC11335656
PMID: 39170682

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


343. Brain Struct Funct. 2021 Mar;226(2):415-424. doi: 10.1007/s00429-020-02185-5. 
Epub 2021 Jan 12.

Poorer clinical outcomes for older adult monolinguals when matched to bilinguals 
on brain health.

Berkes M(1), Calvo N(1), Anderson JAE(2), Bialystok E(3); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, York University, 4700 Keele Street, Toronto, ON, 
M3J 1P3, Canada.
(2)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, York University, 4700 Keele Street, Toronto, ON, 
M3J 1P3, Canada. ellenb@yorku.ca.

Previous studies have reported bilingualism to be a proxy of cognitive reserve 
(CR) based on evidence that bilinguals express dementia symptoms ~ 4 years later 
than monolinguals yet present with greater neuropathology at time of diagnosis 
when clinical levels are similar. The current study provides new evidence 
supporting bilingualism's contribution to CR using a novel brain health matching 
paradigm. Forty cognitively normal bilinguals with diffusion-weighted magnetic 
resonance images recruited from the community were matched with monolinguals 
drawn from a pool of 165 individuals in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) database. White matter integrity was determined for all 
participants using fractional anisotropy, axial diffusivity, and radial 
diffusivity scores. Propensity scores were obtained using white matter measures, 
sex, age, and education as predictive covariates, and then used in one-to-one 
matching between language groups, creating a matched sample of 32 participants 
per group. Matched monolinguals had poorer clinical diagnoses than that 
predicted by chance from a theoretical null distribution, and poorer cognitive 
performances than matched bilinguals as measured by scores on the MMSE. The 
findings provide support for the interpretation that bilingualism acts as a 
proxy of CR such that monolinguals have poorer clinical and cognitive outcomes 
than bilinguals for similar levels of white matter integrity even before 
clinical symptoms appear.

DOI: 10.1007/s00429-020-02185-5
PMCID: PMC7914196
PMID: 33432426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: None


344. Front Aging Neurosci. 2024 Dec 23;16:1517613. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1517613. 
eCollection 2024.

Dynamic changes and prognostic value of glutathione S-transferase alpha in mild 
cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease.

Tang Y(#)(1), Li N(#)(1), Dai L(1), Wang X(1), Lai X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Chongqing University Central Hospital, Chongqing 
Emergency Medical Center, Chongqing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: Glutathione S-transferase alpha (GSTα) is an important antioxidant 
enzyme closely associated with the onset and progression of neurodegenerative 
diseases. The alterations in GSTα protein levels associated with Alzheimer's 
disease and their impact on cognitive abilities remain unclear. Thus, 
investigating the fluctuations of GSTα protein levels in mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) is essential.
METHODS: DATA were enrolled from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) database, and we studied healthy individuals (as controls, a total of 
54), patients with mild cognitive impairment (345), and patients with 
Alzheimer's disease (96) A one-year follow-up was conducted to collect data on 
the dynamic changes of GSTα protein levels in plasma and primary information 
data, and to analyze the correlation between the changes in GSTα protein levels 
before and after the follow-up and cognitive function and its predictive value.
RESULTS: Plasma GSTα protein levels were significantly lower in the AD group 
than in the CN group (0.94 vs1.05, p = 0.04) and the MCI group (0.94 vs1.09, 
p < 0.001). Plasma GSTα protein level changes were positively correlated with 
altered MMSE levels in MCI and AD patients (r = 0.09, p = 0.04). The AUC (95% 
CI) of the area under the prediction curve of plasma GSTα protein levels for MCI 
was 0.63 (0.54-0.71), p = 0.02, and the AUC (95% CI) of the area under the 
prediction curve of plasma GSTα protein levels for AD was 0.74 (0.69-0.80), 
p < 0.001. At the same time, we plotted ROC curves for the difference in the 
change of plasma GSTα protein levels after 1 year of follow-up. The results 
showed that the AUC (95% CI) of the area under the prediction curve of plasma 
GSTα protein levels change for MCI was 0.76 (0.696-0.83), p < 0.001, and the AUC 
(95% CI) of the area under the prediction curve of plasma GSTα protein levels 
change for AD was 0.75 (0.69-0.80), p < 0.001.
CONCLUSION: The findings of the study indicated notable differences in GSTα 
protein levels among patients with MCI and those with AD after a one-year 
follow-up period. Furthermore, a positive correlation was observed between 
changes in GST αprotein levels and the decline in both baseline and cognitive 
function. This suggests that GSTα protein could potentially act as a biomarker 
for both MCI and AD, offering fresh insights for early detection and 
intervention strategies.

Copyright © 2024 Tang, Li, Dai, Wang and Lai.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1517613
PMCID: PMC11701029
PMID: 39763578

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


345. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 2019 Jul 1;44(4):246-260. doi: 10.1503/jpn.180016.

An artificial neural network model for clinical score prediction in Alzheimer 
disease using structural neuroimaging measures.

Bhagwat N(1), Pipitone J(1), Voineskos AN(1), Chakravarty MM(1); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)From the Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ont. (Bhagwat, Chakravarty); the Cerebral Imaging Centre, 
Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Verdun, Que. (Bhagwat, Chakravarty); 
the Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Research Lab, Research Imaging 
Centre, Campbell Family Mental Health Research Institute, Centre for Addiction 
and Mental Health, Toronto, Ont. (Bhagwat, Pipitone, Voineskos); the Department 
of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont. (Voineskos); and the 
Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, Que. (Chakravarty), 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: The development of diagnostic and prognostic tools for Alzheimer 
disease is complicated by substantial clinical heterogeneity in prodromal 
stages. Many neuroimaging studies have focused on case–control classification 
and predicting conversion from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer disease, 
but predicting scores from clinical assessments (such as the Alzheimer’s Disease 
Assessment Scale or the Mini Mental State Examination) using MRI data has 
received less attention. Predicting clinical scores can be crucial in providing 
a nuanced prognosis and inferring symptomatic severity.
METHODS: We predicted clinical scores at the individual level using a novel 
anatomically partitioned artificial neural network (APANN) model. The model 
combined input from 2 structural MRI measures relevant to the neurodegenerative 
patterns observed in Alzheimer disease: hippocampal segmentations and cortical 
thickness. We evaluated the performance of the APANN model with 10 rounds of 
10-fold cross-validation in 3 experiments, using cohorts from the Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI): ADNI1, ADNI2 and ADNI1 + 2.
RESULTS: Pearson correlation and root mean square error between the actual and 
predicted scores on the Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale (ADNI1: r = 0.60; 
ADNI2: r = 0.68; ADNI1 + 2: r = 0.63) and Mini Mental State Examination (ADNI1: 
r = 0.52; ADNI2: r = 0.55; ADNI1 + 2: r = 0.55) showed that APANN can accurately 
infer clinical severity from MRI data.
LIMITATIONS: To rigorously validate the model, we focused primarily on large 
cross-sectional baseline data sets with only proof-of-concept longitudinal 
results.
CONCLUSION: The APANN provides a highly robust and scalable framework for 
predicting clinical severity at the individual level using high-dimensional, 
multimodal neuroimaging data.

© 2019 Joule Inc. or its licensors

DOI: 10.1503/jpn.180016
PMCID: PMC6606432
PMID: 30720260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


346. Med Image Anal. 2017 May;38:205-214. doi: 10.1016/j.media.2015.10.008. Epub 2015 
Nov 10.

A novel relational regularization feature selection method for joint regression 
and classification in AD diagnosis.

Zhu X(1), Suk HI(2), Wang L(1), Lee SW(3), Shen D(4); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and BRIC, The University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, USA.
(2)Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Republic of 
Korea.
(3)Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Republic of 
Korea. Electronic address: sw.lee@korea.ac.kr.
(4)Department of Radiology and BRIC, The University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, USA; Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, 
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: dgshen@med.unc.edu.

In this paper, we focus on joint regression and classification for Alzheimer's 
disease diagnosis and propose a new feature selection method by embedding the 
relational information inherent in the observations into a sparse multi-task 
learning framework. Specifically, the relational information includes three 
kinds of relationships (such as feature-feature relation, response-response 
relation, and sample-sample relation), for preserving three kinds of the 
similarity, such as for the features, the response variables, and the samples, 
respectively. To conduct feature selection, we first formulate the objective 
function by imposing these three relational characteristics along with an 
ℓ2,1-norm regularization term, and further propose a computationally efficient 
algorithm to optimize the proposed objective function. With the 
dimension-reduced data, we train two support vector regression models to predict 
the clinical scores of ADAS-Cog and MMSE, respectively, and also a support 
vector classification model to determine the clinical label. We conducted 
extensive experiments on the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
dataset to validate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Our experimental 
results showed the efficacy of the proposed method in enhancing the performances 
of both clinical scores prediction and disease status identification, compared 
to the state-of-the-art methods.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.media.2015.10.008
PMCID: PMC4862945
PMID: 26674971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Int J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;2012:483469. doi: 10.1155/2012/483469. Epub 2012 Feb 
1.

A two-study comparison of clinical and MRI markers of transition from mild 
cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease.

Devanand DP(1), Liu X, Brown PJ, Huey ED, Stern Y, Pelton GH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, New York State Psychiatric Institute, 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, 1051 Riverside Drive, 
Unit 126, New York, NY 10032, USA.

A published predictor model in a single-site cohort study (questionable 
dementia, QD) that contained episodic verbal memory (SRT total recall), 
informant report of function (FAQ), and MRI measures was tested using logistic 
regression and ROC analyses with comparable measures in a second multisite 
cohort study (Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, ADNI). There were 126 
patients in QD and 282 patients in ADNI with MCI followed for 3 years. Within 
each sample, the differences in AUCs between the statistical models were very 
similar. Adding hippocampal and entorhinal cortex volumes to the model 
containing AVLT/SRT, FAQ, age and MMSE increased the area under the curve (AUC) 
in ADNI but not QD, with sensitivity increasing by 2% in ADNI and 2% in QD for a 
fixed specificity of 80%. Conversely, adding episodic verbal memory (SRT/AVLT) 
and FAQ to the model containing age, Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE), hippocampal 
and entorhinal cortex volumes increased the AUC in ADNI and QD, with sensitivity 
increasing by 17% in ADNI and 10% in QD for 80% specificity. The predictor 
models showed similar differences from each other in both studies, supporting 
independent validation. MRI hippocampal and entorhinal cortex volumes showed 
limited added predictive utility to memory and function measures.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/483469
PMCID: PMC3296186
PMID: 22482070


348. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;40(4):967-79. doi: 10.3233/JAD-132090.

Predicting the time to clinically worsening in mild cognitive impairment 
patients and its utility in clinical trial design by modeling a longitudinal 
clinical dementia rating sum of boxes from the ADNI database.

Ito K(1), Hutmacher MM(2).

Author information:
(1)Pfizer Inc, Primary Care Business Unit, Groton, CT, USA.
(2)Ann Arbor Pharmacometrics Group, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

BACKGROUND: Growing interest in treating Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients in 
the earliest stages requires new clinical endpoints. Currently, there is no 
established clinical endpoint or treatment duration for mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) trials.
OBJECTIVE: This analysis attempts to answer "how long the MCI clinical trial 
would be necessary" using the Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) as 
a clinical endpoint, where CDR-SB is an example of a suitable tool to assess 
both cognition and function as a single primary efficacy outcome.
METHODS: A longitudinal model was developed to predict the CDR-SB time-profile. 
The CDR-SB is considered ideal to assess both cognition and function as a single 
primary endpoint in MCI trials. The median time for clinically "worsening", 
defined using several thresholds for change from baseline, was calculated using 
individual CDR-SB predictions. Covariates predictive of worsening were also 
evaluated.
RESULTS: The median time to a 1-point change in CDR-SB was approximately 2 years 
in MCI patients. Higher baseline severity in disease, lower hippocampal volume, 
and ApoE4 carrier status were significant covariates predicting shorter times to 
worsening (faster progress). The results indicate that at least a 2-year trial 
would be necessary with 30% (or more) disease modifying drug with a sample size 
of n = 350 to detect the significant difference from placebo (80% power) and to 
achieve the target mean effect size of 0.5 point change in CDR-SB.
CONCLUSION: Predictions of CDR-SB changes from a longitudinal model are able to 
inform study design and possible enrichment strategies, based on covariate 
analyses, for prospective planning of clinical trials in MCI patients.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-132090
PMID: 24531162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Nucl Med. 2011 Aug;52(8):1218-26. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.111.090902. Epub 2011 
Jul 15.

Evaluation of a calibrated (18)F-FDG PET score as a biomarker for progression in 
Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment.

Herholz K(1), Westwood S, Haense C, Dunn G.

Author information:
(1)Wolfson Molecular Imaging Centre, School of Cancer and Enabling Sciences, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. karl.herholz@manchester.ac.uk

Increasingly, clinical trials are being planned in patients with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) to prevent or delay the onset of dementia in Alzheimer disease 
(AD) by disease-modifying intervention. Inclusion of imaging techniques as 
biomarkers for patient selection and assessment of outcome is expected to 
increase trial efficacy. PET using (18)F-FDG provides objective information 
about the impairment of synaptic function and could, with appropriate 
standardization, qualify as a biomarker.
METHODS: We evaluated a predefined quantitative measure (PET score) that is 
extracted automatically from (18)F-FDG PET scans using a sample of controls (n = 
44), patients with MCI (n = 94), and patients with mild AD (n = 40) from the 
Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Subjects received 4 scans and 
clinical assessments over 2 y.
RESULTS: PET scores provide much higher test-retest reliability than standard 
neuropsychologic test scores (Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive 
[ADAS-cog] and Mini-Mental State Examination) and superior signal strength for 
measuring progression. At the same time, they are related linearly to ADAS-cog 
scores, thus providing a valid measure of cognitive impairment. In addition, PET 
scores at study entry in MCI patients significantly predict clinical progression 
to dementia with a higher accuracy than Mini-Mental State Examination and 
ADAS-cog.
CONCLUSION: (18)F-FDG PET scores are a valid imaging biomarker to monitor the 
progression of MCI to AD. Their superior test-retest reliability and signal 
strength will allow the reduction in the number of subjects needed or shortening 
of study duration substantially.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.111.090902
PMID: 21764801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2009;28(3):259-66. doi: 10.1159/000241879. Epub 2009 
Sep 25.

Performance of FDG PET for detection of Alzheimer's disease in two independent 
multicentre samples (NEST-DD and ADNI).

Haense C(1), Herholz K, Jagust WJ, Heiss WD.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Neurological Research, Cologne, Germany.

AIM: We investigated the performance of FDG PET using an automated procedure for 
discrimination between Alzheimer's disease (AD) and controls, and studied the 
influence of demographic and technical factors.
METHODS: FDG PET data were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) [102 controls (76.0 +/- 4.9 years) and 89 AD patients (75.7 
+/- 7.6 years, MMSE 23.5 +/- 2.1) and the Network for Standardisation of 
Dementia Diagnosis (NEST-DD) [36 controls (62.2 +/- 5.0 years) and 237 AD 
patients (70.8 +/- 8.3 years, MMSE 20.9 +/- 4.4). The procedure created t-maps 
of abnormal voxels. The sum of t-values in predefined areas that are typically 
affected by AD (AD t-sum) provided a measure of scan abnormality associated with 
a preset threshold for discrimination between patients and controls.
RESULTS: AD patients had much higher AD t-sum scores compared to controls (p < 
0.01), which were significantly related to dementia severity (ADNI: r = -0.62, p 
< 0.01; NEST-DD: r = -0.59, p < 0.01). Early-onset AD patients had significantly 
higher AD t-sum scores than late-onset AD patients (p < 0.01). Differences 
between databases were mainly due to different age distributions. The predefined 
AD t-sum threshold yielded a sensitivity and specificity of 83 and 78% in ADNI 
and 78 and 94% in NEST-DD, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The automated FDG PET analysis procedure provided good 
discrimination power, and was most accurate for early-onset AD.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000241879
PMCID: PMC7077083
PMID: 19786778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Alzheimers Dement. 2013 Feb;9(1 Suppl):S45-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.11.002. 
Epub 2012 Jun 1.

Rationale for use of the Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes as a primary 
outcome measure for Alzheimer's disease clinical trials.

Cedarbaum JM(1), Jaros M, Hernandez C, Coley N, Andrieu S, Grundman M, Vellas B; 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Cytokinetics, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA. jcedarbaum@cytokinetics.com

BACKGROUND: We used the database of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) to explore the psychometric properties of the Clinical 
Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) to consider its utility as an outcome 
measure for clinical trials in early and mild, as well as later, stages of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD).
METHODS: We assessed internal consistency, structural validity, convergent 
validity, and 2-year internal and external responsiveness of the CDR-SB using 
data from 382 subjects with early or mild AD at entry into the ADNI study.
RESULTS: The CDR-SB assesses both cognitive and functional domains of AD 
disability. Mean scores declined nearly linearly; CDR-SB cognitive and 
functional subsums contributed equally to total scores at both very mild (early) 
and mild stages of the disease.
CONCLUSIONS: The CDR-SB has psychometric properties that make it attractive as a 
primary outcome measure that comprehensively assesses both cognitive and 
functional disability in AD patients. It may prove particularly useful for 
studies in early, predementia stages of AD.

Copyright © 2013 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.11.002
PMID: 22658286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2011 Jan-Mar;25(1):73-84. doi: 
10.1097/WAD.0b013e3181f5b8d8.

Derivation of a new ADAS-cog composite using tree-based multivariate analysis: 
prediction of conversion from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer disease.

Llano DA(1), Laforet G, Devanarayan V; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL, USA. daniel.llano@abbott.com

Model-based statistical approaches were used to compare the ability of the 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale (ADAS-cog), 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography and 
volumetric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) markers to predict 12-month 
progression from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to Alzheimer disease (AD). 
Using the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) data set, 
properties of the 11-item ADAS-cog (ADAS.11), the 13-item ADAS-cog (ADAS.All) 
and novel composite scores were compared, using weighting schemes derived from 
the Random Forests (RF) tree-based multivariate model. Weighting subscores using 
the RF model of ADAS.All enhanced discrimination between elderly controls, MCI 
and AD patients. The ability of the RF-weighted ADAS-cog composite and 
individual scores, along with neuroimaging or biochemical biomarkers to predict 
MCI to AD conversion over 12 months was also assessed. Although originally 
optimized to discriminate across diagnostic categories, the ADAS. All, weighted 
according to the RF model, did nearly as well or better than individual or 
composite baseline neuroimaging or CSF biomarkers in prediction of 12-month 
conversion from MCI to AD. These suggest that a modified subscore weighting 
scheme applied to the 13-item ADAS-cog is comparable to imaging or CSF markers 
in prediction of conversion from MCI to AD at 12 months.

Copyright © 2011 by Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0b013e3181f5b8d8
PMID: 20847637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Front Aging Neurosci. 2024 Mar 6;16:1335878. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1335878. 
eCollection 2024.

Anosognosia is associated with increased prevalence and faster development of 
neuropsychiatric symptoms in mild cognitive impairment.

Wang S(1), Mimmack K(1), Cacciamani F(1)(2)(3)(4), Elnemais Fawzy M(5)(6), Munro 
C(1)(5)(6), Gatchel J(6)(7)(8), Marshall GA(1)(5)(6), Gagliardi G(1)(5)(6), 
Vannini P(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(2)Bordeaux Population Health Center, University of Bordeaux, Inserm, Bordeaux, 
France.
(3)Sorbonne Université, Institut du Cerveau - Paris Brain Institute - ICM, CNRS, 
Inria, Inserm, AP-HP, Hôpital de la Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(4)Qarinel SAS, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(6)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(8)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA, United 
States.

INTRODUCTION: Both the loss of awareness for cognitive decline (a. k.a 
anosognosia) and neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS) are common in patients with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia, even in prodromal stages, and may exacerbate 
functional impairment and negatively impact caregiver burden. Despite the high 
impact of these symptoms on patients and their caregivers, our knowledge of how 
they develop across the AD spectrum is limited. Here, we explored the 
cross-sectional and longitudinal associations between anosognosia and NPS in 
individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: We included 237 participants from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) with a baseline clinical diagnosis of MCI. Everyday Cognition 
(ECog) questionnaire scores were used to measure complaints from participants 
and study-partners at baseline and annually over a mean of 4.29 years [standard 
deviation (SD) = 2.72]. Anosognosia was defined as the study-partner having an 
ECog score ≥2.5/4 and the participant having an ECog score < 2.5/4 on their 
baseline measure and their last observation without more than two consecutive 
deviating observations during the follow-up period. The 12-item 
study-partner-rated Neuropsychiatric Inventory determined the presence or 
absence of specific NPS. Survival analyses were performed to analyze the 
frequency and temporal onset of NPS over time in individuals with and without 
anosognosia.
RESULTS: Thirty-eight out of 237 participants displayed anosognosia. Groups had 
similar lengths of follow-up at baseline (p > 0.9), though participants with 
anosognosia had lower MMSE scores (p = 0.049) and a higher proportion of 
amyloid-positivity using PET (p < 0.001. At baseline, the frequencies of 
agitation (p = 0.029) and disinhibition (p < 0.001) were higher in the 
anosognosia group compared to the non-anosognosia group. Survival analyses 
showed earlier onset of seven of the 12 NPS in the anosognosia group (p's < 
0.001).
DISCUSSION: Loss of awareness for cognitive decline is associated with greater 
frequency and earlier onset of NPS over time in participants with MCI. These 
results support the hypothesis of a potential common underlying 
neurophysiological process for anosognosia and NPS, a finding that needs to be 
addressed in future studies.

Copyright © 2024 Wang, Mimmack, Cacciamani, Elnemais Fawzy, Munro, Gatchel, 
Marshall, Gagliardi and Vannini.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1335878
PMCID: PMC10950916
PMID: 38511196

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


354. Front Aging Neurosci. 2024 Dec 19;16:1513930. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1513930. 
eCollection 2024.

Association between Alzheimer's disease pathologic products and age and a 
pathologic product-based diagnostic model for Alzheimer's disease.

Zhen W(1), Wang Y(2), Zhen H(3), Zhang W(2), Shao W(2), Sun Y(2), Qiao Y(2), Jia 
S(2), Zhou Z(2), Wang Y(2), Chen L(2), Zhang J(1), Peng D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, Handan Chinese Medicine Hospital, Handan, Hebei, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) has a major negative impact on people's 
quality of life, life, and health. More research is needed to determine the 
relationship between age and the pathologic products associated with AD. 
Meanwhile, the construction of an early diagnostic model of AD, which is mainly 
characterized by pathological products, is very important for the diagnosis and 
treatment of AD.
METHOD: We collected clinical study data from September 2005 to August 2024 from 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. Using 
correlation analysis method like cor function, we analyzed the pathology 
products (t-Tau, p-Tau, and Aβ proteins), age, gender, and Minimum Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) scores in the ADNI data. Next, we investigated the 
relationship between pathologic products and age in the AD and non-AD groups 
using linear regression. Ultimately, we used these features to build a 
diagnostic model for AD.
RESULTS: A total of 1,255 individuals were included in the study (mean [SD] age, 
73.27 [7.26] years; 691male [55.1%]; 564 female [44.9%]). The results of the 
correlation analysis showed that the correlations between pathologic products 
and age were, in descending order, Tau (Corr=0.75), p-Tau (Corr=0.71), and Aβ 
(Corr=0.54). In the AD group, t-Tau protein showed a tendency to decrease with 
age, but it was not statistically significant. p-Tau protein levels similarly 
decreased with age and its decrease was statistically significant. In contrast 
to Tau protein, in the AD group, Aβ levels increased progressively with age. In 
the non-AD group, the trend of pathologic product levels with age was 
consistently opposite to that of the AD group. We finally screened the optimal 
AD diagnostic model (AUC=0.959) based on the results of correlation analysis and 
by using the Xgboost algorithm and SVM algorithm.
CONCLUSION: In a novel finding, we observed that Tau protein and Aβ had opposite 
trends with age in both the AD and non-AD groups. The linear regression curves 
of the AD and non-AD groups had completely opposite trends. Through a machine 
learning approach, we constructed an AD diagnostic model with excellent 
performance based on the selected features.

Copyright © 2024 Zhen, Wang, Zhen, Zhang, Shao, Sun, Qiao, Jia, Zhou, Wang, 
Chen, Zhang and Peng.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1513930
PMCID: PMC11693723
PMID: 39749254

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


355. J Alzheimers Dis. 2024;97(1):219-228. doi: 10.3233/JAD-230917.

Type 2 Diabetes Moderates the Association Between Amyloid and 1-Year Change in 
Everyday Functioning in Older Veterans.

Alshaheri Durazo A(1)(2), Weigand AJ(3), Bangen KJ(2)(4), Membreno R(1)(2), 
Mudaliar S(2)(4), Thomas KR(2)(4); Department of Defense Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)San Diego State University, San Diego, CA, USA.
(2)VA San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, CA, USA.
(3)San Diego State University/University of California, San Diego Joint Doctoral 
Program in Clinical Psychology, San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) affects ∼25% of Veterans, a 
prevalence rate double that of the general population. T2DM is associated with 
greater dementia risk and has been shown to exacerbate the impact of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) risk factors on declines in daily functioning; however, there are 
few studies that investigate these patterns in older Veterans.
OBJECTIVE: This study sought to determine whether T2DM moderates the association 
between amyloid-β (Aβ) positron emission tomography (PET) and 1-year change in 
everyday functioning in older Veterans.
METHODS: One-hundred-ninety-eight predominately male Vietnam-Era Veterans 
without dementia from the Department of Defense-Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (DoD-ADNI) with (n = 74) and without (n = 124) T2DM completed Aβ PET 
imaging and everyday functioning measures, including the Clinical Dementia 
Rating-Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) and Everyday Cognition (ECog). Linear mixed effects 
models tested the moderating role of T2DM on the association between Aβ PET and 
1-year change in everyday functioning.
RESULTS: The 3-way T2DM×Aβ PET×time interaction was significant for CDR-SB 
(p < 0.001) as well as the Memory (p = 0.007) and Language (p = 0.011) subscales 
from the ECog. Greater amyloid burden was associated with greater increases in 
functional difficulties, but only in Veterans with T2DM.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher Aβ was only associated with declines in everyday functioning 
over 1 year in Veterans with T2DM. Given that people with T2DM are more likely 
to have co-occurring cerebrovascular disease, the combination of multiple 
neuropathologies may result in faster declines. Future studies should examine 
how diabetes duration, severity, and medications impact these associations.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-230917
PMID: 38160359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Neuroimage. 2010 Aug 1;52(1):109-18. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.04.006. Epub 
2010 Apr 9.

Measurement of hippocampal atrophy using 4D graph-cut segmentation: application 
to ADNI.

Wolz R(1), Heckemann RA, Aljabar P, Hajnal JV, Hammers A, Lötjönen J, Rueckert 
D; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, UK. 
r.wolz@imperial.ac.uk

We propose a new method of measuring atrophy of brain structures by 
simultaneously segmenting longitudinal magnetic resonance (MR) images. In this 
approach a 4D graph is used to represent the longitudinal data: edges are 
weighted based on spatial and intensity priors and connect spatially and 
temporally neighboring voxels represented by vertices in the graph. Solving the 
min-cut/max-flow problem on this graph yields the segmentation for all 
timepoints in a single step. By segmenting all timepoints simultaneously, a 
consistent and atrophy-sensitive segmentation is obtained. The application to 
hippocampal atrophy measurement in 568 image pairs (Baseline and Month 12 
follow-up) as well as 362 image triplets (Baseline, Month 12, and Month 24) from 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) confirms previous 
findings for atrophy in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and healthy aging. Highly 
significant correlations between hippocampal atrophy and clinical variables 
(Mini Mental State Examination, MMSE and Clinical Dementia Rating, CDR) were 
found and atrophy rates differ significantly according to subjects' ApoE 
genotype. Based on one year atrophy rates, a correct classification rate of 82% 
between AD and control subjects is achieved. Subjects that converted from Mild 
Cognitive Impairment (MCI) to AD after the period for which atrophy was measured 
(i.e., after the first 12 months) and subjects for whom conversion is yet to be 
identified were discriminated with a rate of 64%, a promising result with a view 
to clinical application. Power analysis shows that 67 and 206 subjects are 
needed for the AD and MCI groups respectively to detect a 25% change in volume 
loss with 80% power and 5% significance.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.04.006
PMID: 20382238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Integr Neurosci. 2024 Dec 23;23(12):220. doi: 10.31083/j.jin2312220.

The Correlations between Volume Loss of Temporal and Subcortical Functional 
Subregions and Cognitive Impairment at Various Stages of Cognitive Decline.

Lu F(1), Shi C(2), Rao D(1), Yue W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan Medical 
College, 637000 Nanchong, Sichuan, China.
(2)Department of Radiology, Qionglai Medical Centre Hospital, 611530 Chengdu, 
Sichuan, China.

BACKGROUND: The relationship between subregion atrophy in the entire temporal 
lobe and subcortical nuclei and cognitive decline at various stages of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is unclear.
METHODS: We selected 711 participants from the AD Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
database, which included 195 cases of cognitively normal (CN), 271 cases of 
early Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) (EMCI), 132 cases of late MCI (LMCI), and 
113 cases of AD. we looked at how subregion atrophy in the temporal lobe and 
subcortical nuclei correlated with cognition at different stages of AD. The 
volume of the subregions was measured from the human Brainnetome atlas (BNA-246) 
using voxel-based morphometry and discriminant and correlation analyses were 
performed.
RESULTS: Only the left premotor thalamus demonstrated significant shrinkage in 
individuals with EMCI (p = 0.012). Discriminant analysis revealed that the left 
rostral Brodmann area 20 has the highest discriminatory ability among all 
temporal subregions to distinguish patients with AD from CN. While the left 
caudal hippocampus can efficiently distinguish patients with LMCI from EMCI. 
While the right rostral Brodmann area 20 was the most effective in 
distinguishing AD from LMCI. Correlation analysis revealed that the left nucleus 
accumbens, left caudal area 35/36, and left sensory thalamus had a mild 
correlation with cognitive scores measured using the Alzheimer's Disease 
Assessment Scale-Cognitive (ADAS-cog) 13 and Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE) scores.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings show that the right rostral area 20 in the inferior 
temporal gyrus plays a significant role in cognitive impairment in AD.

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by IMR Press.

DOI: 10.31083/j.jin2312220
PMID: 39735962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Alzheimers Dis. 2011;27(1):155-61. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2011-110491.

Lack of Association Between COMT Polymorphisms and Apathy in Alzheimer's 
Disease.

David R(1), Friedman L, Mulin E, Noda A, Le Duff F, Kennedy Q, Garcia R, Robert 
PH, Yesavage JA, Zeitzer JM; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Centre Mémoire de Ressources de Recherche - EA CoBTeK, CHU University of Nice 
Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France. david.r@chu-nice.fr

We tested the hypothesis that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) are associated with apathy in individuals 
with Alzheimer's disease (AD). We analyzed a cohort of 105 Caucasian individuals 
with AD (age = 79.3 ± 7.03 years; MMSE = 20.2 ± 4.4) according to the presence 
of apathy, as defined either by the Neuropsychiatric Inventory or the Apathy 
Inventory. Polymorphisms in seventeen SNPs in COMT were examined. A replication 
cohort consisting of 176 Caucasian AD subjects in the ADNI database was also 
analyzed. None of the candidate gene SNPs were significantly associated with the 
presence of apathy in either cohort. We did not find any SNPs in COMT that were 
consistently associated with apathy in individuals with AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2011-110491
PMID: 21785189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


359. BMC Neurol. 2024 Feb 27;24(1):78. doi: 10.1186/s12883-024-03577-4.

The SNP rs6859 in NECTIN2 gene is associated with underlying heterogeneous 
trajectories of cognitive changes in older adults.

Rajendrakumar AL(1), Arbeev KG(2), Bagley O(1), Yashin AI(1), Ukraintseva S(1); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Biodemography of Aging Research Unit, Social Science Research Institute, Duke 
University, Durham, NC, 27708-0408, USA.
(2)Biodemography of Aging Research Unit, Social Science Research Institute, Duke 
University, Durham, NC, 27708-0408, USA. ka29@duke.edu.

BACKGROUND: Functional decline associated with dementia, including in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), is not uniform across individuals, and respective 
heterogeneity is not yet fully explained. Such heterogeneity may in part be 
related to genetic variability among individuals. In this study, we investigated 
whether the SNP rs6859 in nectin cell adhesion molecule 2 (NECTIN2) gene (a 
major risk factor for AD) influences trajectories of cognitive decline in older 
participants from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed records on 1310 participants from the ADNI 
database for the multivariate analysis. We used longitudinal measures of 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores in participants, who were 
cognitively normal, or having AD, or other cognitive deficits to investigate the 
trajectories of cognitive changes. Multiple linear regression, linear mixed 
models and latent class analyses were conducted to investigate the association 
of the SNP rs6859 with MMSE.
RESULTS: The regression coefficient per one allele dose of the SNP rs6859 was 
independently associated with MMSE in both cross-sectional (-2.23, p < 0.01) and 
linear mixed models (-2.26, p < 0.01) analyses. The latent class model with 
three distinct subgroups (class 1: stable and gradual decline, class 2: 
intermediate and late decline, and class 3: lowest and irregular) performed best 
in the posterior classification, 42.67% (n = 559), 21.45% (n = 281), 35.88% 
(n = 470) were classified as class 1, class 2, and class 3. In the heterogeneous 
linear mixed model, the regression coefficient per one allele dose of rs6859 - A 
risk allele was significantly associated with MMSE class 1 and class 2 
memberships and related decline; Class 1 (-2.28, 95% CI: -4.05, -0.50, 
p < 0.05), Class 2 (-5.56, 95% CI: -9.61, -1.51, p < 0.01) and Class 3 (-0.37, 
95% CI: -1.62, 0.87, p = 0.55).
CONCLUSIONS: This study found statistical evidence supporting the classification 
of three latent subclass groups representing complex MMSE trajectories in the 
ADNI cohort. The SNP rs6859 can be suggested as a candidate genetic predictor of 
variation in modeling MMSE trajectory, as well as for identifying latent classes 
with higher baseline MMSE. Functional studies may help further elucidate this 
relationship.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12883-024-03577-4
PMCID: PMC10898142
PMID: 38408961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


360. Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. 2013 Mar 13;8669:86693M-. doi: 10.1117/12.2006727.

Effects of T2-Weighted MRI Based Cranial Volume Measurements on Studies of the 
Aging Brain.

Vuong P, Drucker D, Schwarz C, Fletcher E, Decarli C, Carmichael O.

Many brain aging studies use total intracranial volume (TIV) as a proxy measure 
of premorbid brain size that is unaffected by neurodegeneration. T1-weighted 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) sequences are commonly used to measure TIV, but 
T2-weighted MRI sequences provide superior contrast between the cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) bounding the premorbid brain space and surrounding dura mater. In 
this study, we compared T1-based and T2-based TIV measurements to assess the 
practical impact of this superior contrast on studies of brain aging. 810 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) participants, including 
healthy elders and those with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's 
Disease (AD), received T1-weighted and T2-weighted MRI at their baseline 
evaluation. TIV was automatically estimated from T1-weighted images using 
FreeSurfer version 4.3 (T1TIV), and an automated active contour method was used 
to estimate TIV from T2-weighted images (T2TIV). The correlation between T1TIV 
and T2TIV was high (.93), and disagreement was greater on larger heads. However, 
correcting a FreeSurfer-based measure of total parenchymal volume by dividing it 
by T2TIV led to stronger expected associations with a standardized measure of 
cognitive dysfunction (MMSE) in Poisson regression models among individuals with 
AD (z=1.73 vs. 1.09) and MCI (z=3.15 vs. 2.79) than a corresponding parenchymal 
volume measure divided by T1TIV. This effect was enhanced when the analysis was 
restricted to the cases where T1TIV and T2TIV disagreed the most. These findings 
suggest that T2-based TIV measurements may be higher fidelity than T1-based TIV 
measurements, thus leading to greater sensitivity to detect biologically 
plausible brain-behavior associations.

DOI: 10.1117/12.2006727
PMCID: PMC3864960
PMID: 24353391


361. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2011 Mar 21;3(2):9. doi: 10.1186/alzrt68.

For debate: substituting placebo controls in long-term Alzheimer's prevention 
trials.

Spiegel R(1), Berres M, Miserez AR, Monsch AU; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)University Hospital Department of Geriatrics, Memory Clinic, Schanzenstrasse 
55, CH 4031 Basel, Switzerland. rene.spiegel@unibas.ch.

INTRODUCTION: Novel compounds with potential to attenuate or stop the 
progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD) from its presymptomatic stage to 
dementia are being tested in man. The study design commonly used is the 
long-term randomized, placebo-controlled trial (RPCT), meaning that many 
patients will receive placebo for 18 months or longer. It is ethically 
problematic to expose presymptomatic AD patients, who by definition are at risk 
of developing dementia, to prolonged placebo treatment. As an alternative to 
long-term RPCTs we propose a novel clinical study design, termed the placebo 
group simulation approach (PGSA), using mathematical models to forecast outcomes 
of presymptomatic AD patients from their own baseline data. Forecasted outcomes 
are compared with outcomes observed on candidate drugs, thus replacing a 
concomitant placebo group.
METHODS: First models were constructed using mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. One 
outcome is the Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scale - cognitive subscale (ADAScog) 
score after 24 months, predicted in a linear regression model; the other is the 
trajectory over 36 months of a composite neuropsychological test score 
(Neuro-Psychological Battery (NP-Batt)), using a mixed model. Demographics and 
clinical, biological and neuropsychological baseline values were tested as 
potential predictors in both models.
RESULTS: ADAScog scores after 24 months are predicted from gender, obesity, 
Functional Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ) and baseline scores of Mini-Mental 
State Examination, ADAScog and NP-Batt with an R2 of 0.63 and a residual 
standard deviation of 0.67, allowing reasonably precise estimates of sample 
means. The model of the NP-Batt trajectory has random intercepts and slopes and 
fixed effects for body mass index, time, apolipoprotein E4, age, FAQ, baseline 
scores of ADAScog and NP-Batt, and four interaction terms. Estimates of the 
residual standard deviation range from 0.3 to 0.5 on a standard normal scale. If 
novel drug candidates are expected to diminish the negative slope of scores with 
time, a change of 0.04 per year could be detected in samples of 400 with a power 
of about 80%.
CONCLUSIONS: First PGSA models derived from ADNI MCI data allow prediction of 
cognitive endpoints and trajectories that correspond well with real observed 
values. Corroboration of these models with data from other observational studies 
is ongoing. It is suggested that the PGSA may complement RPCT designs in 
forthcoming long-term drug studies with presymptomatic AD individuals.

DOI: 10.1186/alzrt68
PMCID: PMC3226271
PMID: 21418632


362. Med Image Comput Comput Assist Interv. 2010;13(Pt 2):133-42. doi: 
10.1007/978-3-642-15745-5_17.

Consistent 4D cortical thickness measurement for longitudinal neuroimaging 
study.

Li Y(1), Wang Y, Xue Z, Shi F, Lin W, Shen D; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and BRIC, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, USA.

Accurate and reliable method for measuring the thickness of human cerebral 
cortex provides powerful tool for diagnosing and studying of a variety of 
neuro-degenerative and psychiatric disorders. In these studies, capturing the 
subtle longitudinal changes of cortical thickness during pathological or 
physiological development is of great importance. For this purpose, in this 
paper, we propose a 4D cortical thickness measuring method. Different from the 
existing temporal-independent methods, our method fully utilizes the 4D 
information given by temporal serial images. Therefore, it is much more 
resistant to noises from the imaging and pre-processing steps. The experiments 
on longitudinal image datasets from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) show that our method significantly improves the longitudinal 
stability, i.e. temporal consistency, in cortical thickness measurement, which 
is crucial for longitudinal study. Power analysis of the correlation between 
cortical thickness and Mini-Mental-Status-Examination (MMSE) score demonstrated 
that our method generates statistically more significant results when comparing 
with the 3D temporal-independent thickness measuring methods.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-15745-5_17
PMCID: PMC3021961
PMID: 20879308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Proc SPIE Int Soc Opt Eng. 2014 Mar 21;9034:90342L. doi: 10.1117/12.2042720.

Evaluating the Predictive Power of Multivariate Tensor-based Morphometry in 
Alzheimers Disease Progression via Convex Fused Sparse Group Lasso.

Tsao S(1), Gajawelli N(2), Zhou J(3), Shi J(3), Ye J(3), Wang Y(3), Lepore N(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Arizona State University, Phoenix, Arizona, USA.

Prediction of Alzheimers disease (AD) progression based on baseline measures 
allows us to understand disease progression and has implications in decisions 
concerning treatment strategy. To this end we combine a predictive multi-task 
machine learning method1 with novel MR-based multivariate morphometric surface 
map of the hippocampus2 to predict future cognitive scores of patients. Previous 
work by Zhou et al.1 has shown that a multi-task learning framework that 
performs prediction of all future time points (or tasks) simultaneously can be 
used to encode both sparsity as well as temporal smoothness. They showed that 
this can be used in predicting cognitive outcomes of Alzheimers Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) subjects based on FreeSurfer-based baseline MRI 
features, MMSE score demographic information and ApoE status. Whilst volumetric 
information may hold generalized information on brain status, we hypothesized 
that hippocampus specific information may be more useful in predictive modeling 
of AD. To this end, we applied Shi et al.2s recently developed multivariate 
tensor-based (mTBM) parametric surface analysis method to extract features from 
the hippocampal surface. We show that by combining the power of the multi-task 
framework with the sensitivity of mTBM features of the hippocampus surface, we 
are able to improve significantly improve predictive performance of ADAS 
cognitive scores 6, 12, 24, 36 and 48 months from baseline.

DOI: 10.1117/12.2042720
PMCID: PMC4112760
PMID: 25076826


364. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2014;1(2):99-109.

A Novel Study Paradigm for Long-term Prevention Trials in Alzheimer Disease: The 
Placebo Group Simulation Approach (PGSA): Application to MCI data from the NACC 
database.

Berres M(1), Kukull WA(2), Miserez AR(3), Monsch AU(4), Monsell SE(1), Spiegel 
R(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Applied Sciences Koblenz, RheinAhrCampus Remagen, Remagen, 
Germany.
(2)National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC), Department of Epidemiology, 
University of Washington, Seattle, USA.
(3)diagene Laboratories Inc., Reinach, Switzerland.
(4)University Hospital Department of Geriatrics, Memory Clinic, Basel, 
Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: The PGSA (Placebo Group Simulation Approach) aims at avoiding 
problems of sample representativeness and ethical issues typical of 
placebo-controlled secondary prevention trials with MCI patients. The PGSA uses 
mathematical modeling to forecast the distribution of quantified outcomes of MCI 
patient groups based on their own baseline data established at the outset of 
clinical trials. These forecasted distributions are then compared with the 
distribution of actual outcomes observed on candidate treatments, thus 
substituting for a concomitant placebo group. Here we investigate whether a PGSA 
algorithm that was developed from the MCI population of ADNI 1*, can reliably 
simulate the distribution of composite neuropsychological outcomes from a 
larger, independently selected MCI subject sample.
METHODS: Data available from the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC) 
were used. We included 1523 patients with single or multiple domain amnestic 
mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) and at least two follow-ups after baseline. In 
order to strengthen the analysis and to verify whether there was a drift over 
time in the neuropsychological outcomes, the NACC subject sample was split into 
3 subsamples of similar size. The previously described PGSA algorithm for the 
trajectory of a composite neuropsychological test battery (NTB) score was 
adapted to the test battery used in NACC. Nine demographic, clinical, biological 
and neuropsychological candidate predictors were included in a mixed model; this 
model and its error terms were used to simulate trajectories of the adapted NTB.
RESULTS: The distributions of empirically observed and simulated data after 1, 2 
and 3 years were very similar, with some over-estimation of decline in all 3 
subgroups. The by far most important predictor of the NTB trajectories is the 
baseline NTB score. Other significant predictors are the MMSE baseline score and 
the interactions of time with ApoE4 and FAQ (functional abilities). These are 
essentially the same predictors as determined for the original NTB score.
CONCLUSION: An algorithm comprising a small number of baseline variables, 
notably cognitive performance at baseline, forecasts the group trajectory of 
cognitive decline in subsequent years with high accuracy. The current analysis 
of 3 independent subgroups of aMCI patients from the NACC database supports the 
validity of the PGSA longitudinal algorithm for a NTB. Use of the PGSA in 
long-term secondary AD prevention trials deserves consideration.

PMCID: PMC4268776
PMID: 25530953

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: MB, ARM, AUM and RS are 
founders and owners of a small business that offers services to drug companies 
and CROs based on the PGSA. WAK and SEM declare no conflict of interest.


365. Neuroinformatics. 2013 Jul;11(3):339-53. doi: 10.1007/s12021-013-9180-7.

Semi-supervised multimodal relevance vector regression improves cognitive 
performance estimation from imaging and biological biomarkers.

Cheng B(1), Zhang D, Chen S, Kaufer DI, Shen D; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner M, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Liu 
E, Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, Gamst A, Thomas RG, Donohue M, 
Walter S, Gessert D, Sather T, Beckett L, Harvey D, Gamst A, Donohue M, Kornak 
J, Jack CR Jr, Dale A, Bernstein M, Felmlee J, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, 
Alexander G, DeCarli C, Jagust W, Bandy D, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen 
K, Mathis C, Morris J, Cairns NJ, Taylor-Reinwald L, Trojanowki JQ, Shaw L, Lee 
VM, Korecka M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen 
L, Kachaturian Z, Frank R, Snyder PJ, Molchan S, Kaye J, Quinn J, Lind B, Dolen 
S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Heidebrink JL, 
Lord JL, Petersen R, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Chowdhury M, Stern 
Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Morris JC, Ances B, Carroll M, Leon S, Mintun MA, 
Schneider S, Marson D, Griffith R, Clark D, Grossman H, Mitsis E, Romirowsky A, 
deToledo-Morrell L, Shah RC, Duara R, Varon D, Roberts P, Albert M, Onyike C, 
Kielb S, Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, Glodzik L, De Santi S, Doraiswamy P, Petrella 
JR, Coleman R, Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk D, Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, 
Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein BS, Martin K, Makino 
KM, Ismail M, Brand C, Mulnard RA, Thai G, Mc-Adams-Ortiz C, Womack K, Mathews 
D, Quiceno M, Diaz-Arrastia R, King R, Weiner M, Martin-Cook K, DeVous M, Levey 
AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Anderson HS, Swerdlow RH, Apostolova L, Lu PH, 
Bartzokis G, Silverman DH, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Johnson H, Farlow MR, 
Hake AM, Matthews BR, Herring S, van Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Chertkow H, 
Bergman H, Hosein C, Black S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GY, Feldman H, 
Mudge B, Assaly M, Kertesz A, Rogers J, Trost D, Bernick C, Munic D, Kerwin D, 
Mesulam MM, Lipowski K, Wu CK, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, 
Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall G, Frey M, 
Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh M, Belden C, 
Jacobson S, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, Obisesan TO, 
Wolday S, Bwayo SK, Lerner A, Hudson L, Ogrocki P, Fletcher E, Carmichael O, 
Olichney J, DeCarli C, Kittur S, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana 
S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, Tariot P, Fleisher A, Reeder S, 
Bates V, Capote H, Rainka M, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, 
Brown AD, Pearlson GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Saykin AJ, Santulli RB, Schwartz ES, 
Sink KM, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Querfurth H, Tremont G, 
Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Mintzer J, Flynn Longmire 
C, Spicer K, Finger E, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, Drost D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjin 210016, China.

Accurate estimation of cognitive scores for patients can help track the progress 
of neurological diseases. In this paper, we present a novel semi-supervised 
multimodal relevance vector regression (SM-RVR) method for predicting clinical 
scores of neurological diseases from multimodal imaging and biological 
biomarker, to help evaluate pathological stage and predict progression of 
diseases, e.g., Alzheimer's diseases (AD). Unlike most existing methods, we 
predict clinical scores from multimodal (imaging and biological) biomarkers, 
including MRI, FDG-PET, and CSF. Considering that the clinical scores of mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) subjects are often less stable compared to those of 
AD and normal control (NC) subjects due to the heterogeneity of MCI, we use only 
the multimodal data of MCI subjects, but no corresponding clinical scores, to 
train a semi-supervised model for enhancing the estimation of clinical scores 
for AD and NC subjects. We also develop a new strategy for selecting the most 
informative MCI subjects. We evaluate the performance of our approach on 202 
subjects with all three modalities of data (MRI, FDG-PET and CSF) from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. The experimental 
results show that our SM-RVR method achieves a root-mean-square error (RMSE) of 
1.91 and a correlation coefficient (CORR) of 0.80 for estimating the MMSE 
scores, and also a RMSE of 4.45 and a CORR of 0.78 for estimating the ADAS-Cog 
scores, demonstrating very promising performances in AD studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s12021-013-9180-7
PMCID: PMC3759235
PMID: 23504659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;31 Suppl 3(0 3):S49-58. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-120157.

Structural brain alterations before mild cognitive impairment in ADNI: 
validation of volume loss in a predefined antero-temporal region.

Smith CD(1), Andersen AH, Gold BT; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Trojanowki 
JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Liu E, Green RC, Montine 
T, Petersen R, Aisen P, Gamst A, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, Gessert D, 
Sather T, Beckett L, Harvey D, Kornak J, Dale A, Bernstein M, Felmlee J, Fox N, 
Thompson P, Schuff N, Alexander G, DeCarli C, Jagust W, Bandy D, Koeppe RA, 
Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Morris J, Cairns NJ, Taylor-Reinwald L, 
Trojanowki JQ, Shaw L, Lee VM, Korecka M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, 
Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, Kachaturian Z, Frank R, Snyder PJ, Molchan S, Kaye 
J, Quinn J, Lind B, Dolen S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Spann BM, Brewer J, 
Vanderswag H, Heidebrink JL, Lord JL, Petersen R, Johnson K, Doody RS, 
Villanueva-Meyer J, Chowdhury M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Morris JC, Ances B, 
Carroll M, Leon S, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Marson D, Griffith R, Clark D, 
Grossman H, Mitsis E, Romirowsky A, de Toledo-Morrell L, Shah RC, Duara R, Varon 
D, Roberts P, Albert M, Onyike C, Kielb S, Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, Glodzik L, De 
Santi S, Doraiswamy PM, Petrella JR, Coleman RE, Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk 
D, Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, 
Goldstein BS, Martin K, Makino KM, Ismail MS, Brand C, Mulnard RA, Thai G, 
Mc-Adams-Ortiz C, Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Diaz-Arrastia R, King R, 
Weiner M, Martin-Cook K, DeVous M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, 
Anderson HS, Swerdlow RH, Apostolova L, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, Silverman DH, 
Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Johnson H, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews BR, Herring 
S, van Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Chertkow H, Bergman H, Hosein C, Black S, 
Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GY, Feldman H, Mudge B, Assaly M, Kertesz A, 
Rogers J, Trost D, Bernick C, Munic D, Kerwin D, Mesulam MM, Lipowski K, Wu CK, 
Johnson N, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, 
Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall G, Frey M, Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Lane B, 
Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh M, Belden C, Jacobson S, Kowall N, Killiany R, 
Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, Obisesan TO, Wolday S, Bwayo SK, Lerner A, 
Hudson L, Ogrocki P, Fletcher E, Carmichael O, Olichney J, DeCarli C, Kittur S, 
Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda 
A, Nguyen D, Tariot P, Fleisher A, Reeder S, Bates V, Capote H, Rainka M, 
Scharre DW, Kataki M, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, Brown AD, Pearlson GD, Blank K, 
Anderson K, Saykin AJ, Santulli RB, Schwartz ES, Sink KM, Williamson JD, Garg P, 
Watkins F, Ott BR, Querfurth H, Tremont G, Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, 
Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Mintzer J, Longmire CF, Spicer K, Finger E, Rachinsky I, 
Rogers J, Kertesz A, Drost D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Chandler Medical Center, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY 40536-0098, USA. csmith@mri.uky.edu

Volume losses in the medial temporal lobe, posterior cingulated, and 
orbitofrontal region have been observed in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Smaller 
reductions in similar regions have also been reported in amnestic mild cognitive 
impairment (aMCI), a canonical precursor to AD. We previously demonstrated that 
volume loss in bilateral anteromedial temporal lobe is present at baseline in 
longitudinally followed normal subjects who later developed MCI or AD. In this 
study we compared grey matter volumes within this predefined anteromedial 
temporal region (AMTR) at baseline between: 1) normal subjects enrolled in the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) who subsequently developed 
cognitive complaints as reflected in a CDR memory box score of 0.5; and 2) 
normal subjects who remained normal over a median of 48 months of follow-up (CDR 
sum of boxes 0). We found significantly decreased volume within AMTR in the ADNI 
memory complainers. To relate AMTR results to those from conventional anatomy, 
we demonstrate that volumes extracted with the ICBM amygdala region had the best 
correspondence with AMTR volumes. In contrast, regions that have demonstrated 
volume loss in frank MCI and AD in ADNI, e.g., the posterior cingulate, did not 
show volume loss. These findings provide independent confirmation that volume 
changes preceding MCI occur in AMTR, a region of overlap between amygdala and 
anterior hippocampus.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2012-120157
PMCID: PMC3652624
PMID: 22460332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Proc IEEE Int Symp Biomed Imaging. 2012 May;2012:1515-1518. doi: 
10.1109/ISBI.2012.6235860. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

COMBINING REGIONAL METRICS FOR DISEASE-RELATED BRAIN POPULATION ANALYSIS.

Ye DH(1), Hamm J(2), Pohl KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH, 43210.

In this paper, we present a new metric combining regional measurements to 
improve image based population studies that use manifold learning techniques. 
These studies currently rely on a single score over the whole brain image 
domain. Thus, they require large amount of training data to uncover spatially 
complex variation in the whole brain impacted by diseases. We reduce the impact 
of this issue by first computing pairwise measurements in local regions 
separately and then combining regional measurements into a single pairwise 
metric. We apply the new metric to learn the manifold of ADNI data and evaluate 
the resulting morphological representation by fitting multiple linear regression 
models to the mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score. The regression models 
show that the morphological representations from the proposed metric achieves 
higher estimation accuracy of MMSE score compared to those from the conventional 
global scores.

DOI: 10.1109/ISBI.2012.6235860
PMCID: PMC5459375
PMID: 28593031


368. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2006 Nov;46(11):791-4.

[Neuroimaging in mild cognitive impairment].

[Article in Japanese]

Fukuyama H(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Brain Research Center, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine.

I summarized the present status of Neuroimaging studies in mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI). Nation wide multi-center study with regard to single photon 
emission study had been started 3 year before and it is now going on in a good 
cooperation of many institute, covering 319 cases. This study was name as 
J-COSMIC (Japan Cooperative SPECT Study on Assessment of Mild Impairment of 
Cognitive Function). After one-year follow-up, 30 out of 120 cases were 
converted to Alzheimer's disease from MCI. Since last year, ADNI (Alzheimer' 
disease Neuroimaging Initiative) had started in US, very similar to J-COSMIC, 
but they adopted PET and MRI as the examination tool. The findings based on 
J-COSMIC is still unclear, but, we can say that the general cognitive evaluation 
methods such as MMSE is better than WMS-R, which measures the memory function 
itself with wide variation in each case. Similar to small size previous works, 
converter from MCI to Alzheimer's disease tended to show hypoperfusion in the 
parietal and frontal regions. Recent advance in the molecular imaging enabled us 
to visualize the deposition of amyloid protein in the brain parenchyma. It is 
still controversial as to application of the early diagnosis of Alzheimer's 
disease or MCI. S. Minoshima reported the hypometabolism in the early stage of 
Alzheimer's disease in the posterior cingulate gyrus or precuneus, but it has 
been still unknown why these areas showed hypoperfusion or hypometabolism in 
early phase of Alzheimer's disease. We examined the fiber connection of 
posterior cingulate region with other brain structures using diffusion weighted 
images. It was very surprising that such kind of small structures had a lot of 
connections, not only contralateral side, but also, parietal and temporal lobes, 
as well as anterior cigulate cortex. The function has been still been unclear, 
but we will be able to disclose their functions in the human brain in the 
future, which will be helpful for understanding the pathophysiological changes 
in MCI.

PMID: 17432181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]