1. J Am Board Fam Med. 2022 Dec 23;35(6):1043-1057. doi: 
10.3122/jabfm.2022.220093R1.

Examining the Effects of Formal Education Level on the Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment.

White RS(1), Barber JM(1), Harp JP(1), Jicha GA(1).

Author information:
(1)From Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington (RSW, 
JMB, JPH, GAJ); Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas (RSW); 
Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington 
(JPH, GAJ).

Brief, global assessments such as the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) are 
widely used in primary care for assessing cognition in older adults. Like other 
neuropsychological instruments, lower formal education can influence MoCA 
interpretation. METHODS: Data from 2 large studies of cognitive aging were 
used-Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and National Alzheimer's 
Coordinating Center (NACC). Both use comprehensive examinations to determine 
cognitive status and have brain amyloid status for many participants. Mixed 
models were used to account for random variation due to data source. RESULTS: 
Cognitively intact participants with lower education (≤12 years) were more 
likely than those with higher education (>12 years) to be classified as 
potentially impaired using the MoCA cutoff of <26 (P < .01). Backwards selection 
revealed 4 MoCA items significantly associated with education (cube copy, serial 
subtraction, phonemic fluency, abstraction). Subtracting these items scores 
yielded an alternative MoCA score with a maximum of 24 and a cutoff of ≤19 for 
classifying participants with mild cognitive impairment. Using the alternative 
MoCA score and cutoff, among cognitively intact participants, both education 
groups were similarly likely to be classified as potentially impaired (P > .67). 
CONCLUSIONS: The alternative MoCA score neutralized the effects of formal 
education. Although further research is needed, this alternative score offers a 
simple procedure for interpreting MoCAs administered to older adults with ≤12 
years education. These educational effects also highlight that the MoCA is part 
of the assessment process-not a singular diagnostic test-and a comprehensive 
workup is necessary to accurately diagnose cognitive impairments.

© Copyright by the American Board of Family Medicine.

DOI: 10.3122/jabfm.2022.220093R1
PMID: 36564192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: There are no conflicting 
or competing interests to declare.


2. J Am Board Fam Med. 2022 Sep 16:jabfm.2022.AP.220093. doi: 
10.3122/jabfm.2022.AP.220093. Online ahead of print.

Examining the Effects of Formal Education Level on the Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment.

White RS(1), Barber JM(2), Harp JP(1), Jicha GA(1).

Author information:
(1)From Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington (RSW, 
JMB, JPH, GAJ); Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas (RSW); 
Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington 
(JPH, GAJ).
(2)From Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington (RSW, 
JMB, JPH, GAJ); Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas (RSW); 
Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington 
(JPH, GAJ). justin.barber@uky.edu.

Brief, global assessments such as the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) are 
widely used in primary care for assessing cognition in older adults. Like other 
neuropsychological instruments, lower formal education can influence MoCA 
interpretation. METHODS: Data from 2 large studies of cognitive aging were 
used-Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and National Alzheimer's 
Coordinating Center (NACC). Both use comprehensive examinations to determine 
cognitive status and have brain amyloid status for many participants. Mixed 
models were used to account for random variation due to data source. RESULTS: 
Cognitively intact participants with lower education (≤12 years) were more 
likely than those with higher education (>12 years) to be classified as 
potentially impaired using the MoCA cutoff of <26 (P < .01). Backwards selection 
revealed 4 MoCA items significantly associated with education (cube copy, serial 
subtraction, phonemic fluency, abstraction). Subtracting these items scores 
yielded an alternative MoCA score with a maximum of 24 and a cutoff of ≤19 for 
classifying participants with mild cognitive impairment. Using the alternative 
MoCA score and cutoff, among cognitively intact participants, both education 
groups were similarly likely to be classified as potentially impaired (P > .67). 
CONCLUSIONS: The alternative MoCA score neutralized the effects of formal 
education. Although further research is needed, this alternative score offers a 
simple procedure for interpreting MoCAs administered to older adults with ≤12 
years education. These educational effects also highlight that the MoCA is part 
of the assessment process-not a singular diagnostic test-and a comprehensive 
workup is necessary to accurately diagnose cognitive impairments.

© Copyright by the American Board of Family Medicine.

DOI: 10.3122/jabfm.2022.AP.220093
PMID: 36113992

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: There are no conflicting 
or competing interests to declare.


3. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Sep;20(9):6008-6031. doi: 10.1002/alz.14065. Epub 2024 
Jul 28.

Osteopontin: A novel marker of pre-symptomatic sporadic Alzheimer's disease.

Quesnel MJ(1)(2), Labonté A(2)(3), Picard C(2)(3), Bowie DC(1)(2), Zetterberg 
H(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9), Blennow K(4)(5)(10)(11), Brinkmalm A(4)(5), Villeneuve 
S(1)(2)(3), Poirier J(1)(2)(3); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; 
PREVENT‐AD Research Group.

Author information:
(1)McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(2)Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Verdun, Québec, Canada.
(3)Centre for the Studies in the Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease, Douglas 
Mental Health University Institute, Verdun, Québec, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, SU/Sahlgrenska, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
SU/Mölndals sjukhus, Mölndal, Sweden.
(6)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen 
Square, London, UK.
(7)UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, London, UK.
(8)Hong Kong Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hong Kong Science Park, 
Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong, China.
(9)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, University of Wisconsin School 
of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin, USA.
(10)Paris Brain Institute, ICM, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Sorbonne University, 
Paris, France.
(11)Neurodegenerative Disorder Research Center, Division of Life Sciences and 
Medicine, and Department of Neurology, Institute on Aging and Brain Disorders, 
University of Science and Technology of China and First Affiliated Hospital of 
USTC, Hefei, P.R. China.

INTRODUCTION: We investigate the role of osteopontin (OPN) in participants with 
Pre-symptomatic Alzheimer's disease (AD), mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and 
in AD brains.
METHODS: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) OPN, AD, and synaptic biomarker levels were 
measured in 109 cognitively unimpaired (CU), parental-history positive 
Pre-symptomatic Evaluation of Experimental or Novel Treatments for Alzheimer's 
Disease (PREVENT-AD) participants, and in 167 CU and 399 participants with MCI 
from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort. OPN levels 
were examined as a function of amyloid beta (Aβ) and tau positivity. Survival 
analyses investigated the link between OPN and rate of conversion to AD.
RESULTS: In PREVENT-AD, CSF OPN was positively correlated with synaptic 
biomarkers. In PREVENT-AD and ADNI, OPN was elevated in CSF Aβ42/40(+)/total 
tau(+) and CSF Aβ42/40(+)/phosphorylated tau181(+) individuals. In ADNI, OPN was 
increased in Aβ(+) positron emission tomography (PET) and tau(+) PET 
individuals, and associated with an accelerated rate of conversion to AD. OPN 
was elevated in autopsy-confirmed AD brains.
DISCUSSION: Strong associations between CSF OPN and key markers of AD 
pathophysiology suggest a significant role for OPN in tau neurobiology, 
particularly in the early stages of the disease.
HIGHLIGHTS: In the Pre-symptomatic Evaluation of Experimental or Novel 
Treatments for Alzheimer's Disease cohort, we discovered that cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) osteopontin (OPN) levels can indicate early synaptic dysfunction, 
tau deposition, and neuronal loss in cognitively unimpaired elderly with a 
parental history. CSF OPN is elevated in amyloid beta(+) positron emission 
tomography (PET) and tau(+) PET individuals. Elevated CSF OPN is associated with 
an accelerated rate of conversion to Alzheimer's disease (AD). Elevated CSF OPN 
is associated with an accelerated rate of cognitive decline on the Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive subscale 13, Montreal Cognitive Assessment, 
Mini-Mental State Examination, and Clinical Dementia Rating Scale Sum of Boxes. 
OPN mRNA and protein levels are significantly upregulated in the frontal cortex 
of autopsy-confirmed AD brains.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14065
PMCID: PMC11497655
PMID: 39072932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JP serves as a scientific advisor to the 
Alzheimer Society of France. HZ has served on scientific advisory boards and/or 
as a consultant for Abbvie, Acumen, Alector, Alzinova, ALZPath, Annexon, 
Apellis, Artery Therapeutics, AZTherapies, CogRx, Denali, Eisai, Nervgen, Novo 
Nordisk, Optoceutics, Passage Bio, Pinteon Therapeutics, Prothena, Red Abbey 
Labs, reMYND, Roche, Samumed, Siemens Healthineers, Triplet Therapeutics, and 
Wave; has given lectures in symposia sponsored by Cellectricon, Fujirebio, 
Alzecure, Biogen, and Roche; and is a co‐founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in 
Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part of the GU Ventures Incubator Program 
(outside submitted work). KB has served as a consultant and on advisory boards 
for Acumen, ALZPath, BioArctic, Biogen, Eisai, Lilly, Moleac Pte. Ltd, Novartis, 
Ono Pharma, Prothena, Roche Diagnostics, and Siemens Healthineers; has served on 
data monitoring committees for Julius Clinical and Novartis; has given lectures, 
produced educational materials, and participated in educational programs for AC 
Immune, Biogen, Celdara Medical, Eisai, and Roche Diagnostics; and is a 
co‐founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part 
of the GU Ventures Incubator Program, outside the work presented in this paper. 
MJQ, AL, CP, DCB, AB, and SV have nothing to disclose. Author disclosures are 
available in the supporting information.


4. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2018 Dec;26(12):1258-1267. doi: 
10.1016/j.jagp.2018.09.009. Epub 2018 Sep 21.

Effects of Normative Adjustments to the Montreal Cognitive Assessment.

Pugh EA(1), Kemp EC(2), van Dyck CH(3), Mecca AP(2), Sharp ES(4); Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Research Unit, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, CT, USA. Electronic address: erika.pugh@yale.edu.
(2)Alzheimer's Disease Research Unit, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Alzheimer's Disease Research Unit, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, CT, USA; Department of Neuroscience, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(4)Alzheimer's Disease Research Unit, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT, USA; Department of Neurology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT, USA; Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). 
As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design and 
implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis 
or writing of this report. A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found 
at: 
http://adni.loni.usc.edu/wpcontent/uploads/how_to_apply/ADNI_Acknowledgement_List.pdf.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate optimal cutoff scores and the effects of normative 
adjustments on the performance of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) as a 
screening instrument for Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and dementia due to 
Alzheimer's disease (AD-dementia).
METHODS: 499 adults 48 to 91 years-old enrolled in the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and were administered the MoCA during baseline. 
Participants were classified as either cognitively normal (CN), MCI, or 
AD-dementia by clinical assessment. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) 
analyses were performed using raw MoCA scores, education-adjusted MoCA scores, 
and a regression-based adjustment derived from the National Alzheimer's 
Coordinating Center data (NACC). Test performance characteristics were 
calculated for various cutoffs after each normative correction method.
RESULTS: Areas under the curve (AUC) were similar for raw, education-adjusted, 
and NACC-adjusted MoCA scores, and demonstrated minimal improvement when 
adjustments of increasing complexity were applied. Our results suggest that the 
optimal cutoff score for distinguising MCI is 24 and for distinguising 
AD-dementia is 22.
CONCLUSIONS: This study adds to the understanding of how normative adjustments 
affect the sensitivity and specificity of the MoCA. Suggested corrections based 
on education alone do not yield improved test characteristics, but small 
improvements are attained when a regression-based correction that accounts for 
age, sex, and education is applied. Furthermore, optimal cutoffs for 
distinguishing CN from MCI or CN from AD-dementia were lower than previously 
reported. Optimal cutoffs to detect MCI and AD-dementia may vary in different 
populations, and further study is needed to determine appropriate use of the 
MoCA as a screening tool.

Copyright © 2018 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jagp.2018.09.009
PMCID: PMC6779033
PMID: 30314940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Front Neurol. 2022 Jul 1;13:888511. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.888511. eCollection 
2022.

Enlarged Perivascular Spaces Are Negatively Associated With Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment Scores in Older Adults.

Libecap TJ(1), Zachariou V(1), Bauer CE(1), Wilcock DM(2)(3), Jicha GA(3)(4), 
Raslau FD(5), Gold BT(1)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY, United States.
(2)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY, United States.
(3)Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY, United States.
(4)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY, United States.
(5)Department of Radiology, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY, United States.
(6)Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectroscopy Center, College of Medicine, 
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, United States.

Emerging evidence suggests that enlarged perivascular spaces (ePVS) may be a 
clinically significant neuroimaging marker of global cognitive function related 
to cerebral small vessel disease (cSVD). We tested this possibility by assessing 
the relationship between ePVS and both a standardized measure of global 
cognitive function, the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), and an established 
marker of cSVD, white matter hyperintensity volume (WMH) volume. One hundred and 
eleven community-dwelling older adults (56-86) underwent neuroimaging and MoCA 
testing. Quantification of region-specific ePVS burden was performed using a 
previously validated visual rating method and WMH volumes were computed using 
the standard ADNI pipeline. Separate linear regression models were run with ePVS 
as a predictor of MoCA scores and whole brain WMH volume. Results indicated a 
negative association between MoCA scores and both total ePVS counts (P ≤ 0.001) 
and centrum semiovale ePVS counts (P ≤ 0.001), after controlling for other 
relevant cSVD variables. Further, WMH volumes were positively associated with 
total ePVS (P = 0.010), basal ganglia ePVS (P ≤ 0.001), and centrum semiovale 
ePVS (P = 0.027). Our results suggest that ePVS burden, particularly in the 
centrum semiovale, may be a clinically significant neuroimaging marker of global 
cognitive dysfunction related to cSVD.

Copyright © 2022 Libecap, Zachariou, Bauer, Wilcock, Jicha, Raslau and Gold.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.888511
PMCID: PMC9283758
PMID: 35847209

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


6. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;90(1):263-270. doi: 10.3233/JAD-220397.

Mini-Mental State Examination and Montreal Cognitive Assessment as Tools for 
Following Cognitive Changes in Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
Participants.

Wang G(1), Estrella A(2), Hakim O(2), Milazzo P(2), Patel S(2), Pintagro C(2), 
Li D(3), Zhao R(4), Vance DE(5), Li W(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)School of Health Professions, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL, USA.
(3)The College, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)School of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(5)School of Nursing, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA) are two commonly used cognitive screening and diagnostic 
tools.
OBJECTIVE: Our goal was to assess their efficacy for monitoring cognitive 
changes, as well as the correlation between the two tests.
METHODS: At baseline, participants in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) were divided into four groups based on their cognitive 
diagnoses: healthy control (HC), early mild cognitive impairment (EMCI), late 
mild cognitive impairment (LMCI), and Alzheimer's disease (AD). MMSE or MoCA 
scores were compared among the four groups using an analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
model with repeated measures with post-hoc Bonferroni correction. For those 
participants who had both MMSE and MoCA assessments done, a Pearson correlation 
analysis was performed between the two assessments for each visit.
RESULTS: The MMSE scores were significantly different among the four groups at 
baseline, which was true for each of the three annual follow-up visits. By 
contrast, the MoCA scores were not significantly different between HC and EMCI 
groups at either baseline or any of the follow-up visits. For participants with 
a diagnosis of LMCI, the cognitive performance deteriorated in a linear manner 
12 months after the baseline, which was independent of MMSE or MoCA. At last, 
the MMSE scores were moderately related to MoCA scores, which got stronger along 
with the time of follow-up.
CONCLUSION: MMSE and MoCA are comparable as cognitive assessment tools to 
monitor cognitive changes. In addition, the measurements of MMSE and MoCA are 
moderately correlated for the follow-up visits.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-220397
PMID: 36093696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Appl Neuropsychol Adult. 2022 Dec 29:1-6. doi: 10.1080/23279095.2022.2161050. 
Online ahead of print.

Clinical value of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment free recall condition alone 
versus cued recall and recognition conditions to detect true memory impairment.

De Wit L(1), Goldstein FC(1), Loring DW(1).

Author information:
(1)Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.

The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) is widely used as a screener to 
characterize cognition. Although only the delayed free recall condition is 
required for administration, performance on the optional cued recall and 
multiple-choice recognition conditions may improve diagnostic accuracy over free 
recall alone. Data on 719 individuals with MCI and 601 controls were obtained 
from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. The Rey 
Auditory Verbal Learning Test (AVLT) delayed free recall condition was used as 
the gold standard of memory status. Participants with T-scores ≤30 (≤2 SDs below 
the mean) were classified as memory "impaired." Binary logistic regressions 
assessed if combined MoCA cued recall/recognition predicted impaired delayed 
recall on the AVLT beyond the contribution of MoCA free recall. Results showed 
that MoCA free recall predicted AVLT delayed recall, and that the addition of 
combined MoCA cued recall/recognition improved the ability to detect impaired 
AVLT recall, with a better overall model fit. The combined MoCA cued 
recall/recognition score also had higher specificity and likelihood ratios in 
detecting memory impairment than MoCA free recall, while higher sensitivity 
values were present for free recall. Thus, the additional administration of the 
MoCA cued recall and recognition is recommended.

DOI: 10.1080/23279095.2022.2161050
PMID: 36583247


8. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Jun 16;14:811739. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.811739. 
eCollection 2022.

Differential Patterns of Domain-Specific Cognitive Complaints and Awareness 
Across the Alzheimer's Disease Spectrum.

Cacciamani F(1)(2), Godefroy V(3), Brambati SM(4)(5), Migliaccio R(3)(6), 
Epelbaum S(1)(6), Montembeault M(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)ARAMISLab, Inserm, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Inria, Paris Brain Institute 
(ICM), Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France.
(2)PHARes Team, Bordeaux Population Health, University of Bordeaux, Inserm, 
Bordeaux, France.
(3)FrontLab, Paris Brain Institute (ICM), Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, 
France.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(5)Centre de recherche de l'Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie de Montréal, 
Montréal, QC, Canada.
(6)Institute of Memory and Alzheimer's disease (IM2A), Pitié-Salpêtrière 
Hospital, Paris, France.
(7)Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(9)Memory & Aging Center, Department of Neurology, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States.

Background: Characterizing self- and informant-reported cognitive complaints, as 
well as awareness of cognitive decline (ACD), is useful for an early diagnosis 
of Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, complaints and ACD related to cognitive 
functions other than memory are poorly studied. Furthermore, it remains unclear 
which source of information is the most useful to distinguish various groups on 
the AD spectrum. Methods: Self- and informant-reported complaints were measured 
with the Everyday Cognition questionnaire (ECog-Subject and ECog-StudyPartner) 
in four domains (memory, language, visuospatial, and executive). ACD was 
measured as the subject-informant discrepancy in the four ECog scores. We 
compared the ECog and ACD scores across cognitive domains between four groups: 
71 amyloid-positive individuals with amnestic AD, 191 amnestic mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), or 118 cognitively normal (CN), and 211 amyloid-negative CN 
controls, selected from the ADNI database. Receiver operating characteristic 
curves analysis was performed to evaluate the accuracy of the ECog and ACD 
scores in discriminating clinical groups. Results: Self- and informant-reported 
complaints were generally distributed as follows: memory, language, executive, 
and visuospatial (from the most severe to the least severe). Both groups of CN 
participants presented on average more memory and language complaints than their 
informant. MCI participants showed good agreement with their informants. AD 
participants presented anosognosia in all domains, but especially for the 
executive domain. The four ECog-StudyPartner sub-scores allowed excellent 
discrimination between groups in almost all classifications and performed 
significantly better than the other two classifiers considered. The ACD was 
excellent in distinguishing the participants with AD from the two groups of CN 
participants. The ECog-Subject was the least accurate in discriminating groups 
in four of the six classifications performed. Conclusion: In research, the study 
of complaint and anosognosia should not be reduced solely to the memory domain. 
In clinical practice, non-amnestic complaints could also be linked to 
Alzheimer's disease. The presence of an informant also seems necessary given its 
accuracy as a source of information.

Copyright © 2022 Cacciamani, Godefroy, Brambati, Migliaccio, Epelbaum and 
Montembeault.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.811739
PMCID: PMC9261482
PMID: 35813963

Conflict of interest statement: SE has received honoraria as a speaker or 
consultant for Eli Lilly, Biogen, Astellas Pharma, Roche, and GE Healthcare. The 
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.


9. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2022;9(2):269-276. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2022.20.

Validity of Online Versus In-Clinic Self-Reported Everyday Cognition Scale.

Howell T(1), Neuhaus J, Glymour MM, Weiner MW, Nosheny RL.

Author information:
(1)Taylor Howell, 4150 Clement Street, #114M Building 13 San Francisco, 
California 94121, USA, Telephone: 415-221-4810 x24222, taylor.howell@ucsf.edu.

BACKGROUND: Online cognitive assessments are alternatives to in-clinic 
assessments.
OBJECTIVES: We evaluated the relationship between online and in-clinic 
self-reported Everyday Cognition Scale (ECog).
METHODS: In 94 Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative and Brain Health 
Registry (ADNI-BHR) participants, we estimated associations between online and 
in-clinic Everyday Cognition using Bland-Altman plots and regression. In 472 
ADNI participants, we estimated reliability of in-clinic Everyday Cognition 
completed six months apart using Bland-Altman plots and regression.
RESULTS: Online Everyday Cognition associations: Mean difference was 0.11 (95% 
limits of agreement: -0.41 to 0.64). In-clinic Everyday Cognition score 
increased by 0.81 for each online Everyday Cognition score unit increase 
(R2=0.60). In-clinic Everyday Cognition reliability: Mean difference was 0.01 
(95% limits of agreement: -0.61 to 0.62). In-clinic Everyday Cognition score at 
enrollment increased by 0.79 for each in-clinic Everyday Cognition score unit 
increase at six months (R2=0.61).
CONCLUSION: Online Everyday Cognition closely corresponded with in-clinic 
Everyday Cognition, supporting validity of using online cognitive assessments to 
more efficiently facilitate Alzheimer's disease research.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2022.20
PMCID: PMC9881822
PMID: 35543000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Taylor Howell has nothing to disclose. John 
Neuhaus reports grants from the National Institutes of Health (NIH). M. Maria 
Glymour reports grants from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the 
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Michael W Weiner reports grants from the 
National Institutes of Health (NIH) (5U19AG024904-14; 1R01AG053798-01A1; R01 
MH098062; U24 AG057437-01; 1U2CA060426-01; 1R01AG058676-01A1; and 
1RF1AG059009-01) and the Department of Defense (DOD) (W81XWH-15-2-0070; 
0W81XWH-12-2-0012; W81XWH-14-1-0462; and W81XWH-13-1-0259); served on advisory 
boards for Alzheon, Inc., Biogen, Cerecin, Dolby Family Ventures, Eli Lilly, 
Merck Sharp and Dohme Corp., Nestle/Nestec, and Roche, University of Southern 
California (USC); provided consulting to Baird Equity Capital, BioClinica, 
Cerecin, Inc., Cytox, Dolby Family Ventures, Duke University, FUJIFILM-Toyama 
Chemical (Japan), Garfield Weston, Genentech, Guidepoint Global, Indiana 
University, Japanese Organization for Medical Device Development, Inc. (JOMDD), 
Nestle/Nestec, NIH, Peerview Internal Medicine, Roche, T3D Therapeutics, 
University of Southern California (USC), and Vida Ventures; acted as a lecturer 
for The Buck Institute for Research on Aging; received funding for academic 
travel from USC; holds stock options with Alzeca, Alzheon Inc., and Anven; 
reports research support from the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute 
(PCORI) (PPRN-1501-26817), California Department of Public Health (CDPH) 
(16-10054), University of Michigan (18-PAF01312), Siemens (444951-54249), Biogen 
(174552), Hillblom Foundation (2015-A-011-NET), Alzheimer’s Association 
(BHR-16-459161), the State of California (18-109929), Johnson and Johnson, Kevin 
and Connie Shanahan, General Electric (GE), VU Medical Center, Australian 
Catholic University (HBI-BHR), The Stroke Foundation, and the Veterans 
Administration. Rachel L Nosheny reports grants from the National Institutes of 
Health (NIH), Alzheimer’s Association, California Department of Public Health, 
and Genentech, Inc.


10. Neurology. 2022 Sep 27;99(13):e1402-e1413. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200898. 
Epub 2022 Jul 6.

Association of Pace of Aging Measured by Blood-Based DNA Methylation With 
Age-Related Cognitive Impairment and Dementia.

Sugden K(1), Caspi A(2), Elliott ML(2), Bourassa KJ(2), Chamarti K(2), Corcoran 
DL(2), Hariri AR(2), Houts RM(2), Kothari M(2), Kritchevsky S(2), Kuchel GA(2), 
Mill JS(2), Williams BS(2), Belsky DW(2), Moffitt TE(2); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative*.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Psychology and Neuroscience (K.S., A.C., M.L.E., K.C., 
A.R.H., R.M.H., B.S.W., T.E.M.), and Center for Genomic and Computational 
Biology (K.S., A.C., B.S.W., T.E.M.), Duke University, Durham, NC; Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences (A.C., T.E.M.), Duke University School of 
Medicine, Durham, NC; Social, Genetic, and Developmental Psychiatry Centre (A.C, 
T.E.M.), Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology, and Neuroscience, King's College 
London, UK. Center for the Study of Aging and Human Development (K.J.B.), Duke 
University, Durham, NC; Department of Genetics (D.L.C.), University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill; Butler Columbia Aging Center (M.K., 
D.W.B.), Columbia University, New York, New York; Sticht Center for Healthy 
Aging and Alzheimer's Prevention (S.K.), Wake Forest School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC; UConn Center on Aging (G.A.K.), University of Connecticut, 
Farmington, Connecticut, USA; College of Medicine and Health (J.S.M.), 
University of Exeter Medical School, Devon, UK; and Department of Epidemiology 
(D.W.B.), Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, New York, New 
York. karen.sugden@duke.edu.
(2)From the Department of Psychology and Neuroscience (K.S., A.C., M.L.E., K.C., 
A.R.H., R.M.H., B.S.W., T.E.M.), and Center for Genomic and Computational 
Biology (K.S., A.C., B.S.W., T.E.M.), Duke University, Durham, NC; Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences (A.C., T.E.M.), Duke University School of 
Medicine, Durham, NC; Social, Genetic, and Developmental Psychiatry Centre (A.C, 
T.E.M.), Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology, and Neuroscience, King's College 
London, UK. Center for the Study of Aging and Human Development (K.J.B.), Duke 
University, Durham, NC; Department of Genetics (D.L.C.), University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill; Butler Columbia Aging Center (M.K., 
D.W.B.), Columbia University, New York, New York; Sticht Center for Healthy 
Aging and Alzheimer's Prevention (S.K.), Wake Forest School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC; UConn Center on Aging (G.A.K.), University of Connecticut, 
Farmington, Connecticut, USA; College of Medicine and Health (J.S.M.), 
University of Exeter Medical School, Devon, UK; and Department of Epidemiology 
(D.W.B.), Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, New York, New 
York.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: DNA methylation algorithms are increasingly used to 
estimate biological aging; however, how these proposed measures of 
whole-organism biological aging relate to aging in the brain is not known. We 
used data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and the 
Framingham Heart Study (FHS) Offspring Cohort to test the association between 
blood-based DNA methylation measures of biological aging and cognitive 
impairment and dementia in older adults.
METHODS: We tested 3 "generations" of DNA methylation age algorithms (first 
generation: Horvath and Hannum clocks; second generation: PhenoAge and GrimAge; 
and third generation: DunedinPACE, Dunedin Pace of Aging Calculated from the 
Epigenome) against the following measures of cognitive impairment in ADNI: 
clinical diagnosis of dementia and mild cognitive impairment, scores on 
Alzheimer disease (AD) / Alzheimer disease and related dementias (ADRD) 
screening tests (Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale, Mini-Mental State 
Examination, and Montreal Cognitive Assessment), and scores on cognitive tests 
(Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test, Logical Memory test, and Trail Making Test). 
In an independent replication in the FHS Offspring Cohort, we further tested the 
longitudinal association between the DNA methylation algorithms and the risk of 
developing dementia.
RESULTS: In ADNI (N = 649 individuals), the first-generation (Horvath and Hannum 
DNA methylation age clocks) and the second-generation (PhenoAge and GrimAge) DNA 
methylation measures of aging were not consistently associated with measures of 
cognitive impairment in older adults. By contrast, a third-generation measure of 
biological aging, DunedinPACE, was associated with clinical diagnosis of 
Alzheimer disease (beta [95% CI] = 0.28 [0.08-0.47]), poorer scores on Alzheimer 
disease/ADRD screening tests (beta [Robust SE] = -0.10 [0.04] to 0.08[0.04]), 
and cognitive tests (beta [Robust SE] = -0.12 [0.04] to 0.10 [0.03]). The 
association between faster pace of aging, as measured by DunedinPACE, and risk 
of developing dementia was confirmed in a longitudinal analysis of the FHS 
Offspring Cohort (N = 2,264 individuals, hazard ratio [95% CI] = 1.27 
[1.07-1.49]).
DISCUSSION: Third-generation blood-based DNA methylation measures of aging could 
prove valuable for measuring differences between individuals in the rate at 
which they age and in their risk for cognitive decline, and for evaluating 
interventions to slow aging.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200898
PMCID: PMC9576288
PMID: 35794023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Alzheimers Dement. 2023 Nov;19(11):4987-4998. doi: 10.1002/alz.13083. Epub 2023 
Apr 23.

Comparing machine learning-derived MRI-based and blood-based neurodegeneration 
biomarkers in predicting syndromal conversion in early AD.

Cai Y(1), Fan X(1), Zhao L(2), Liu W(1), Luo Y(2), Lau AYL(1), Au LWC(1), Shi 
L(2)(3), Lam BYK(1)(4), Ko H(1), Mok VCT(1).

Author information:
(1)Lau Tat-chuen Research Centre of Brain Degenerative Diseases in Chinese, 
Therese Pei Fong Chow Research Centre for Prevention of Dementia, Lui Che Woo 
Institute of Innovative Medicine, Gerald Choa Neuroscience Institute, Li Ka 
Shing Institute of Health Science, Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine 
and Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)BrainNow Research Institute, Hong Kong Science and Technology Park, Hong Kong 
SAR, China.
(3)Department of Imaging and Interventional Radiology, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(4)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Wellcome Centre for 
Integrative Neuroimaging, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

INTRODUCTION: We compared the machine learning-derived, MRI-based Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) resemblance atrophy index (AD-RAI) with plasma neurofilament light 
chain (NfL) level in predicting conversion of early AD among cognitively 
unimpaired (CU) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) subjects.
METHODS: We recruited participants from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) who had the following data: clinical features (age, gender, 
education, Montreal Cognitive Assessment [MoCA]), structural MRI, plasma 
biomarkers (p-tau181 , NfL), cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers (CSF) (Aβ42, 
p-tau181 ), and apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 genotype. We defined AD using CSF 
Aβ42 (A+) and p-tau181 (T+). We defined conversion (C+) if a subject progressed 
to the next syndromal stage within 4 years.
RESULTS: Of 589 participants, 96 (16.3%) were A+T+C+. AD-RAI performed better 
than plasma NfL when added on top of clinical features, plasma p-tau181 , and 
APOE ε4 genotype (area under the curve [AUC] = 0.832 vs. AUC = 0.650 among CU, 
AUC = 0.853 vs. AUC = 0.805 among MCI) in predicting A+T+C+.
DISCUSSION: AD-RAI outperformed plasma NfL in predicting syndromal conversion of 
early AD.
HIGHLIGHTS: AD-RAI outperformed plasma NfL in predicting syndromal conversion 
among early AD. AD-RAI showed better metrics than volumetric hippocampal 
measures in predicting syndromal conversion. Combining clinical features, plasma 
p-tau181 and apolipoprotein E (APOE) with AD-RAI is the best model for 
predicting syndromal conversion.

© 2023 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.13083
PMID: 37087687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Health Inf Sci Syst. 2020 Jul 23;8(1):24. doi: 10.1007/s13755-020-00114-8. 
eCollection 2020 Dec.

The correlation of everyday cognition test scores and the progression of 
Alzheimer's disease: a data analytics study.

Thabtah F(1), Spencer R(1), Ye Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Digital Technologies, Manukau Institute of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand.

The process of diagnosing dementia conditions, especially Alzheimer's disease, 
and the cognitive tests that are involved in this process, are important areas 
of study. Everyday Cognition (ECog) is one test that can be used as part of 
Alzheimer's disease diagnosis to measure cognitive decline in different areas. 
In this study, we investigate two versions of the ECog test: the study partner 
reported version (ECogSP), and the patient reported version (ECogPT). We compare 
these, using statistical analysis and machine learning techniques, to create 
classification models to demonstrate the progression in ECog scores over time by 
using the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative longitudinal data 
repository (ADNI); participants are classed with having normal cognition, mild 
cognitive impairment, or Alzheimer's disease. We found that participants who are 
diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease at baseline, or during a subsequent visit, 
tend to self-report consistent ECogPT scores over time indicating no change in 
cognitive ability. However, study partners tend to report higher and increasing 
ECogSP scores on behalf of participants in the same diagnosis category; this 
would indicate a degradation in the participant's cognitive ability over time, 
consistent with the progress of Alzheimer's disease.

© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020.

DOI: 10.1007/s13755-020-00114-8
PMCID: PMC7378134
PMID: 32765845


13. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;87(2):761-769. doi: 10.3233/JAD-215388.

Measuring Subjective Cognitive Decline in Older Adults: Harmonization Between 
the Cognitive Change Index and the Measurement of Everyday Cognition 
Instruments.

Wells LF(1), Risacher SL(2)(3), McDonald BC(2)(3)(4), Farlow MR(3)(4), Brosch 
J(3)(4), Gao S(3)(5), Apostolova LG(2)(3)(4), Saykin AJ(2)(3)(4); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(2)Center for Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(3)Indiana Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
IN, USA.
(5)Department of Biostatistics and Health Data Science, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

BACKGROUND: Self and informant (proxy or study partner) reports of everyday 
cognitive functioning have been shown to be associated with incipient 
neurodegenerative disease. The 20-item Cognitive Change Index (CCI) and the 
39-item Measurement of Everyday Cognition (ECog) were each developed to 
characterize early subjective changes in cognitive function.
OBJECTIVE: We examined the relationship between CCI and ECog self and 
informant-based evaluations to determine content overlap and provide a 
co-calibration for converting between these widely used instruments.
METHODS: 950 participants (57.1% female, mean age = 71.2 years) from ADNI and 
the Indiana ADRC with self-based evaluations and 279 participants (60.9% female, 
mean age = 71.8 years) with informant-based evaluations (Indiana ADRC) were 
included. Analyzed variables for the CCI and ECog included domain mean scores, 
memory domain total scores, and total scores for all items. Spearman 
correlations, regression analyses, and frequency distributions were used to 
assess the relationship between CCI and ECog. Sex, age, years of education, 
race/ethnicity, APOE ɛ4 carrier status, and baseline diagnosis were also 
analyzed as potentially relevant covariates.
RESULTS: CCI and ECog total scores were highly correlated for the self 
(r = 0.795, p < 0.001) and informant-based (r = 0.840, p < 0.001) versions, as 
expected. Frequency distributions of self and informant total scores were 
generated and plotted separately. Quadratic regressions for self (r2 = 0.626) 
and informant (r2 = 0.741) scores were used to create a translation table 
between the CCI and ECog total scores.
CONCLUSION: Self and informant total scores can be harmonized and translated 
between the CCI and ECog to facilitate cross-study and longitudinal assessment 
of perceived cognitive change, an important patient-reported outcome.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-215388
PMCID: PMC9169561
PMID: 35367962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Aging Clin Exp Res. 2018 Oct;30(10):1167-1176. doi: 10.1007/s40520-018-0899-8. 
Epub 2018 Jan 29.

Utility of the Spanish version of the Everyday Cognition scale in the diagnosis 
of mild cognitive impairment and mild dementia in an older cohort from the 
Argentina-ADNI.

Russo MJ(1), Cohen G(2), Chrem Mendez P(2), Campos J(2), Martín ME(2), Clarens 
MF(2), Tapajoz F(2), Harris P(2), Sevlever G(2), Allegri RF(2).

Author information:
(1)Center of Aging and Memory of Neurological Research Institute (FLENI), 
Montañeses 2325, C1428AQK, Buenos Aires, Argentina. jrusso@fleni.org.ar.
(2)Center of Aging and Memory of Neurological Research Institute (FLENI), 
Montañeses 2325, C1428AQK, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

INTRODUCTION: The performance of activities of daily living in elderly patients 
with memory disorders is directly related to living independently and to 
autonomy. Documenting and assessing functional capacity through detailed scales 
is important for both diagnostic and treatment recommendations. The Everyday 
Cognition (ECog) scale is a relatively new informant-rated measure of cognitive 
and functional abilities. In the present study, the discriminant validity of the 
ECog scale was evaluated in cognitively intact controls (CN) and in patients 
with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and mild Alzheimer's disease (AD) from the 
Argentina-ADNI cohort to establish diagnostic accuracy. In addition, we compared 
the sensitivity and specificity of ECog against Functional Assessment 
Questionnaire (FAQ) scale to discriminate among the three groups.
METHODS: We evaluated 15 CN, 28 MCI, and 13 mild AD subjects. External, 
convergent and divergent validity and internal consistency were examined.
RESULTS: The average total score on the ECog was significantly different across 
the three diagnostic syndromes (p < .05). The ECog was more sensitive than FAQ 
in discriminating between CN and MCI patients and between MCI and AD subjects. 
The ECog showed a strong correlation with FAQ, and moderate correlations with 
neuropsychological tests. Cronbach's alpha was .98.
CONCLUSIONS: The ECog scale is an efficient instrument for the differentiation 
of individuals with mild dementia or MCI from normal older adults, with good 
accuracy and good correlation with other tests measuring daily and cognitive 
functions. Comparing against FAQ, ECog was more useful in assessing changes in 
functionality in MCI patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s40520-018-0899-8
PMID: 29380265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Dec;20(12):8651-8660. doi: 10.1002/alz.14309. Epub 2024 
Oct 29.

A short version of the Everyday Cognition scale can predict clinical progression 
and cognitive decline.

Manjavong M(1), Diaz A(2)(3)(4), Ashford MT(2)(3)(4), Aaronson A(3)(4), Miller 
MJ(2)(3)(4), Kang JM(5), Mackin S(3)(4)(6), Tank R(7), Weiner M(2)(3)(4)(8)(9), 
Nosheny R(3)(4)(6); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatric Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(2)Northern California Institute for Research and Education (NCIRE), San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, VA Advanced Imaging Research 
Center, San Francisco, California, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Gil Medical Center, Gachon University College of 
Medicine, Incheon, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(7)Dementia Research Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, University College 
London, London, UK.
(8)Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Everyday Cognition scale (ECog-39) scores are associated with 
future cognitive decline. We investigated whether the 12-item ECog (ECog-12), 
which is being collected in Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)4, 
can predict progression.
METHODS: Baseline self (PT)- and study partner (SP)-ECog-12 data were extracted 
from the 39-item version collected in the ADNI. Weibull analysis examined the 
relationship between baseline ECog-12 and future clinical progression (change in 
Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes [CDR-SB] scores and diagnostic 
conversion).
RESULTS: Higher PT- and SP-ECog-12 scores were associated with faster CDR-SB 
worsening, with hazard ratios in cognitively unimpaired (CU) 3.34 and 9.61, mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) 1.44 and 2.82, and dementia 0.93 and 1.82. They were 
associated with conversion from CU to MCI 3.01 and 6.24 and MCI to dementia 1.61 
and 3.07.
DISCUSSION: SP-ECog-12 provided a higher prognostic value for predicting 
clinical progression, so this can help identify and monitor patients at risk in 
research and health-care settings.
HIGHLIGHTS: The 12-item Everyday Cognition scale (ECog-12) data obtained from 
both raters increased diagnostic conversion risk from cognitively unimpaired to 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and from MCI to dementia. ECog-12, rated by 
study partners, was associated with an increased risk of Clinical Dementia 
Rating Sum of Boxes worsening in all diagnostic groups. Our results provide 
novel information about the specific scoring outputs and rater types 
(participant vs. study partner) of ECog-12 that can facilitate screening, 
prioritization, and longitudinal monitoring of the clinical progression of 
participants in Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 4 and other 
Alzheimer's disease clinical studies, clinical trials, and in health-care 
settings.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14309
PMCID: PMC11667505
PMID: 39470161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Manchumad Manjavong has no conflicts of 
interest to declare. Adam Diaz has no conflicts of interest to declare. Dr. 
Miriam T. Ashford receives funding to her institution from NIH. Anna Aaronson 
has no conflicts of interest to declare. Dr. Melanie J. Miller has no conflicts 
of interest to declare. Dr. Jae Myeong Kang has no conflicts of interest to 
declare. Dr. R. Scott Mackin has received research support from The National 
Institute of Mental Health, the National Institute on Aging, and Johnson and 
Johnson, during the past 2 years. Dr. Rachana Tank has no conflicts of interest 
to declare. Dr. Weiner reports grants from National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
grants from Department of Defense (DOD), grants from Patient‐Centered Outcomes 
Research Institute (PCORI), grants from California Department of Public Health 
(CDPH), grants from University of Michigan, grants from Siemens, grants from 
Biogen, grants from Hillblom Foundation, grants from Alzheimer's Association, 
grants from The State of California, grants from Johnson & Johnson, grants from 
Kevin and Connie Shanahan, grants from GE, grants from VUmc, grants from 
Australian Catholic University (HBI‐BHR), grants from The Stroke Foundation, 
grants from Veterans Administration, personal fees from Acumen Pharmaceutical, 
personal fees from Cerecin, personal fees from Dolby Family Ventures, personal 
fees from Eli Lilly, personal fees from Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., personal fees 
from National Institute on Aging (NIA), personal fees from Nestle/Nestec, 
personal fees from PCORI/PPRN, personal fees from Roche, personal fees from 
University of Southern California (USC), personal fees from NervGen, personal 
fees from Baird Equity Capital, personal fees from BioClinica, personal fees 
from Cytox, personal fees from Duke University, personal fees from Eisai, 
personal fees from FUJIFILM‐Toyama Chemical (Japan), personal fees from Garfield 
Weston, personal fees from Genentech, personal fees from Guidepoint Global, 
personal fees from Indiana University, personal fees from Japanese Organization 
for Medical Device Development, Inc. (JOMDD), personal fees from Medscape, 
personal fees from Peerview Internal Medicine, personal fees from Roche, 
personal fees from T3D Therapeutics, personal fees from WebMD, personal fees 
from Vida Ventures, personal fees from The Buck Institute for Research on Aging, 
personal fees from China Association for Alzheimer's Disease (CAAD), personal 
fees from Japan Society for Dementia Research, personal fees from Korean 
Dementia Society, outside the submitted work; and holds stocks or options with 
Alzheon Inc., Alzeca, and Anven. Dr. Rachel L. Nosheny reports funding from the 
National Institutes of Health (grants to institution), California Department of 
Public Health (grants to institution), and Genentech Inc. (grants to 
institution). Author disclosures are available in the supporting information.


16. J Neurosci Methods. 2022 May 15;374:109581. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2022.109581. 
Epub 2022 Mar 25.

Categorical predictive and disease progression modeling in the early stage of 
Alzheimer's disease.

Platero C(1).

Author information:
(1)Health Science Technology Group, Technical University of Madrid, Ronda de 
Valencia 3, 28012 Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: A preclinical stage of Alzheimer's disease (AD) precedes the 
symptomatic phases of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia, which 
constitutes a window of opportunities for preventive therapies or delaying 
dementia onset.
NEW METHOD: We propose to use categorical predictive models based on survival 
analysis with longitudinal data which are capable of determining subsets of 
markers to classify cognitively unimpaired (CU) subjects who progress into 
MCI/dementia or not. Subsequently, the proposed combination of markers was used 
to construct disease progression models (DPMs), which reveal long-term 
pathological trajectories from short-term clinical data. The proposed 
methodology was applied to a population recruited by the ADNI.
RESULTS: A very small subset of standard MRI-based data, CSF markers and 
cognitive measures was used to predict CU-to-MCI/dementia progression. The 
longitudinal data of these selected markers were used to construct DPMs using 
the algorithms of growth models by alternating conditional expectation (GRACE) 
and the latent time joint mixed effects model (LTJMM). The results show that the 
natural history of the proposed cognitive decline classifies the subjects well 
according to the clinical groups and shows a moderate correlation between the 
conversion times and their estimates by the algorithms.
COMPARISON WITH EXISTING METHODS: Unlike the training of the DPM algorithms 
without preselection of the markers, here, it is proposed to construct and 
evaluate the DPMs using the subsets of markers defined by the categorical 
predictive models.
CONCLUSIONS: The estimates of the natural history of the proposed cognitive 
decline from GRACE were more robust than those using LTJMM. The transition from 
normal to cognitive decline is mostly associated with an increase in temporal 
atrophy, worsening of clinical scores and pTAU/Aβ. Furthermore, pTAU/Aβ, 
Everyday Cognition score and the normalized volume of the entorhinal cortex show 
alterations of more than 20% fifteen years before the onset of cognitive 
decline.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2022.109581
PMID: 35346695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2017 May;65(5):1067-1072. doi: 10.1111/jgs.14779. Epub 2017 
Feb 15.

Multicenter Validation of an MMSE-MoCA Conversion Table.

Bergeron D(1), Flynn K(2), Verret L(1), Poulin S(1), Bouchard RW(1), Bocti C(3), 
Fülöp T(3), Lacombe G(3), Gauthier S(4), Nasreddine Z(5), Laforce RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinique Interdisciplinaire de Mémoire, Département des Sciences 
Neurologiques du CHU de Québec, and Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, 
Québec, Québec, Canada.
(2)University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Université de Sherbrooke, 
Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada.
(4)Alzheimer's Disease Research Unit/Memory Clinic, McGill Centre for Studies in 
Aging, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(5)Neuro Rive-Sud/CEDRA: Centre Diagnostique et Recherche sur la Maladie 
d'Alzheimer, McGill University and Sherbrooke University, Montréal, Quebec, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidence points to the superiority of the MoCA over the 
MMSE as a cognitive screening tool. To facilitate the transition from the MMSE 
to the MoCA in clinical and research settings, authors have developed MMSE-MoCA 
conversion tables. However, it is unknown whether a conversion table generated 
from Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients would apply to patients with other 
dementia subtypes like vascular dementia or frontotemporal dementia. 
Furthermore, the reliability and accuracy of MMSE-MoCA conversion tables has not 
been properly evaluated.
METHOD: We retrospectively examined the MMSE-MoCA relationship in a large 
multicenter sample gathered from 3 Memory Clinics in Quebec, Canada (1492 
patients). We produced an MMSE-MoCA conversion table using the equi-percentile 
method with log-linear smoothing. We then cross-validated our conversion table 
with the ADNI dataset (1202 patients) and evaluated its accuracy for future 
predictions.
RESULTS: The MMSE-MoCA conversion table is consistent with previously published 
tables and has an intra-class correlation of 0.633 with the ADNI sample. 
However, we found that the MMSE-MoCA relationship is significantly modified by 
diagnosis (P < .01), with dementia subtypes associated with a dysexecutive 
syndrome showing a trend towards higher MMSE than other dementia syndromes for a 
given MoCA score. The large width of 95% confidence interval (CI) for a new 
prediction suggests questionable reliability for clinical use.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we validated a conversion table between MMSE and MoCA 
using a large multicenter sample. Our results suggest caution in interpreting 
the tables in heterogeneous clinical populations, as the MMSE-MoCA relationship 
may be different across dementia subtypes.

© 2017, Copyright the Authors Journal compilation © 2017, The American 
Geriatrics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jgs.14779
PMID: 28205215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Brain Commun. 2021 Jun 26;3(3):fcab140. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab140. 
eCollection 2021 Jul.

Machine learning identifies novel markers predicting functional decline in older 
adults.

Valerio KE(1), Prieto S(1), Hasselbach AN(1), Moody JN(1), Hayes SM(1)(2), Hayes 
JP(1)(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Chronic Brain Injury Initiative, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.

The ability to carry out instrumental activities of daily living, such as paying 
bills, remembering appointments and shopping alone decreases with age, yet there 
are remarkable individual differences in the rate of decline among older adults. 
Understanding variables associated with a decline in instrumental activities of 
daily living is critical to providing appropriate intervention to prolong 
independence. Prior research suggests that cognitive measures, neuroimaging and 
fluid-based biomarkers predict functional decline. However, a priori selection 
of variables can lead to the over-valuation of certain variables and exclusion 
of others that may be predictive. In this study, we used machine learning 
techniques to select a wide range of baseline variables that best predicted 
functional decline in two years in individuals from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative dataset. The sample included 398 individuals 
characterized as cognitively normal or mild cognitive impairment. Support vector 
machine classification algorithms were used to identify the most predictive 
modality from five different data modality types (demographics, structural MRI, 
fluorodeoxyglucose-PET, neurocognitive and genetic/fluid-based biomarkers). In 
addition, variable selection identified individual variables across all 
modalities that best predicted functional decline in a testing sample. Of the 
five modalities examined, neurocognitive measures demonstrated the best accuracy 
in predicting functional decline (accuracy = 74.2%; area under the curve = 
0.77), followed by fluorodeoxyglucose-PET (accuracy = 70.8%; area under the 
curve = 0.66). The individual variables with the greatest discriminatory ability 
for predicting functional decline included partner report of language in the 
Everyday Cognition questionnaire, the ADAS13, and activity of the left angular 
gyrus using fluorodeoxyglucose-PET. These three variables collectively explained 
32% of the total variance in functional decline. Taken together, the machine 
learning model identified novel biomarkers that may be involved in the 
processing, retrieval, and conceptual integration of semantic information and 
which predict functional decline two years after assessment. These findings may 
be used to explore the clinical utility of the Everyday Cognition as a 
non-invasive, cost and time effective tool to predict future functional decline.

© The Author(s) (2021). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab140
PMCID: PMC8286801
PMID: 34286271


19. Eur J Med Res. 2023 Oct 12;28(1):427. doi: 10.1186/s40001-023-01265-6.

Bayesian estimation for the accuracy of three neuropsychological tests in 
detecting Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment: a retrospective 
analysis of the ADNI database.

Wang X(#)(1)(2), Li F(#)(1)(2), Tian J(1)(2), Gao Q(3)(4), Zhu H(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health, 
Capital Medical University, No. 10, Xi Toutiao You Anmenwai, Beijing, 100069, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of Clinical Epidemiology, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health, 
Capital Medical University, No. 10, Xi Toutiao You Anmenwai, Beijing, 100069, 
People's Republic of China. gaoqi@ccmu.edu.cn.
(4)Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of Clinical Epidemiology, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, People's Republic of China. gaoqi@ccmu.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Maternal and Child Health, School of Public Health, Capital 
Medical University, No. 10, Xi Toutiao You Anmenwai, Beijing, 100069, People's 
Republic of China. zhuhuiping@ccmu.edu.cn.
(6)Laboratory for Gene-Environment and Reproductive Health, Laboratory for 
Clinical Medicine, Capital Medical University, Beijing, People's Republic of 
China. zhuhuiping@ccmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The neuropathological confirmation serves as the gold standard for 
diagnosing Alzheimer's disease (AD), but it is usually not available to the 
living individuals. In addition, the gold standard for diagnosing Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (MCI) remains unclear yet. Neuropsychological testing, such as the 
Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-cog), is commonly 
used tests in identifying AD and MCI, offering convenience, affordability, 
non-invasiveness, and accessibility in clinical settings. We aimed to accurately 
evaluate the discriminative ability of the three tests administrated at the same 
visit simultaneously in detecting AD and MCI due to AD in the absence of a gold 
standard.
METHODS: A total of 1289 participants aged over 65 were included from the 
baseline visits of Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Bayesian latent 
class models, accounting for conditional dependence between MoCA and MMSE, were 
conducted to assess the diagnostic accuracy of the three tests for detecting AD 
and MCI.
RESULTS: In detecting AD, the ADAS-cog had the highest Youden's Index (0.829), 
followed by the MoCA(0.813) and MMSE(0.796). The ADAS-cog and MoCA showed 
similar sensitivity (0.922 vs 0.912) and specificity (0.907 vs 0.901), while the 
MMSE had lower sensitivity (0.874) and higher specificity (0.922). For MCI 
detection, the ADAS-cog had the highest Youden's Index (0.704) compared to the 
MoCA (0.614) and MMSE (0.478). The ADAS-cog exhibited the highest sensitivity, 
closely followed by the MoCA and MMSE (0.869 vs 0.845 vs 0.757), and the 
ADAS-cog also had good specificity (0.835 vs 0.769 vs 0.721). The estimated true 
prevalence of AD among individuals aged over 65 was 20.0%, and the estimated 
true prevalence of MCI due to AD was 24.8%.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that the ADAS-cog and MoCA are reliable tools 
for detecting AD and MCI, while the MMSE may be less sensitive in detecting 
these conditions. A large underdiagnosis of the MCI and Alzheimer's population 
still remains in clinical screening.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s40001-023-01265-6
PMCID: PMC10568914
PMID: 37821912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


20. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2019 Dec;6(12):2448-2459. doi: 10.1002/acn3.50938. Epub 
2019 Nov 13.

Study partner-reported decline identifies cognitive decline and dementia risk.

Nosheny RL(1)(2), Jin C(3), Neuhaus J(3), Insel PS(2), Mackin RS(1)(2), Weiner 
MW(2)(4); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative investigators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California.
(2)San Francisco Veteran's Administration Medical Center, San Francisco, 
California.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(4)Department of Radiology & Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California.

OBJECTIVE: Identifying individuals at risk for cognitive decline, Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (MCI), and dementia due to Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a critical 
need. Functional decline is associated with risk and can be efficiently assessed 
by participants and study partners (SPs). We tested the hypothesis that 
SP-reported functional decline is an independent predictor of dementia risk and 
cognitive decline.
METHODS: In 1048 older adults in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI), we measured associations between Everyday Cognition Scale scores (ECog, 
self- and SP-reported versions) and (1) baseline and longitudinal change in 
neuropsychological test (NPT scores) across multiple cognitive domains; (2) 
diagnostic conversion to MCI or dementia. Models included Mini Mental Status 
Exam (MMSE) score and ApoE ε4 genotype (APOE) as predictors. Model fits were 
compared with and without predictors of interest included.
RESULTS: SP-reported ECog was the strongest predictor of cognitive decline 
across multiple domains, as well as diagnostic conversion. Self-reported ECog 
was associated with baseline NPT scores in some cognitive domains, and 
diagnostic conversion to MCI in participants with biomarker evidence for AD 
(elevated brain β-amyloid, Aβ). Models including SP-reported ECog were 
significantly stronger at predicting outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: SP-reported functional decline is an independent indicator of 
cognitive decline and dementia risk, even when accounting for cognitive 
screening, genetic risk, demographics, and self-report decline. The results 
provide a rationale for greater utilization of SP-reported functional decline to 
identify those at risk for dementia due to AD and other causes.

© 2019 The Authors. Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology published by 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc on behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/acn3.50938
PMCID: PMC6917311
PMID: 31721455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RLN, JN, PSI, JN, and RSM have no potential 
conflicts of interest to disclose related to the work in this manuscript. MWW 
reports personal fees from Bioclinica, personal fees from Cerecin/Accera, 
personal fees from Genentech, grants and personal fees from NIH, personal fees 
from Indiana University, personal fees from CHU Toulouse, personal fees from St. 
George University, personal fees from Eli Lilly, personal fees from Roche, 
personal fees from Lynch Group GLC, personal fees from Dolby Family Ventures, 
personal fees from Nestec/Nestle, personal fees from Health & Wellness Partners 
for American Academy of Neurology Conference, personal fees from AC Immune, 
personal fees from Alzheimer's Association, personal fees from Merck, personal 
fees from Bionest Partners, personal fees from Alzheon, Inc., personal fees from 
University of Tokyo, personal fees from Australian Catholic University, personal 
fees from University of Melbourne, personal fees from National Cntr for 
Geriatrics & Gerontology (Japan), grants from Department of Defense (DOD), 
grants from Johnson & Johnson (J&J), grants from Connie & Kevin Shanahan, grants 
from General Electric Research Labs (GE), grants from PCORI, grants from 
California Dept. of Public Health, grants from VUmc Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, grants from University of Michigan, grants from Ray & Dagmar 
Dolby Fund, grants from Biogen, grants from Hillblom Foundation, grants from 
Stroke Foundation, grants from Siemens, grants from Veterans Administration. All 
relationships stated above are outside the submitted work.


21. Am J Clin Nutr. 2022 Dec 19;116(6):1492-1506. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/nqac236.

Associations of erythrocyte omega-3 fatty acids with cognition, brain imaging 
and biomarkers in the Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative: 
cross-sectional and longitudinal retrospective analyses.

Rouch L(1), Virecoulon Giudici K(1), Cantet C(1), Guyonnet S(1)(2), Delrieu 
J(1)(2)(3), Legrand P(4), Catheline D(4), Andrieu S(2)(5), Weiner 
M(6)(7)(8)(9)(10), de Souto Barreto P(1)(2), Vellas B(1)(2); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Gerontopole of Toulouse, Institute of Ageing, Toulouse University Hospital, 
Toulouse, Franc.
(2)CERPOP Centre d'Epidémiologie et de Recherche en Santé des Populations, 
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale 1295, University of 
Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(3)Toulouse NeuroImaging Center, Université de Toulouse, Institut National de la 
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, UPS, Toulouse, France.
(4)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Human Nutrition, Institut Agro, Institut 
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale 1241, Rennes, France.
(5)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Toulouse University Hospital, 
Toulouse, France.
(6)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Clin Nutr. 2022 Dec 19;116(6):1474-1475. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/nqac248.

BACKGROUND: The association between omega-3 (ω-3) PUFAs and cognition, brain 
imaging and biomarkers is still not fully established.
OBJECTIVES: The aim was to analyze the cross-sectional and retrospective 
longitudinal associations between erythrocyte ω-3 index and cognition, brain 
imaging, and biomarkers among older adults.
METHODS: A total of 832 Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 3 (ADNI-3) 
participants, with a mean (SD) age of 74.0 (7.9) y, 50.8% female, 55.9% 
cognitively normal, 32.7% with mild cognitive impairment, and 11.4% with 
Alzheimer disease (AD) were included. A low ω-3 index (%EPA + %DHA) was defined 
as the lowest quartile (≤3.70%). Cognitive tests [composite score, AD Assessment 
Scale Cognitive (ADAS-Cog), Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS), Trail Making Test, 
Category Fluency, Mini-Mental State Examination, Montreal Cognitive Assessment] 
and brain variables [hippocampal volume, white matter hyperintensities (WMHs), 
positron emission tomography (PET) amyloid-β (Aβ) and tau] were considered as 
outcomes in regression models.
RESULTS: Low ω-3 index was not associated with cognition, hippocampal, and WMH 
volume or brain Aβ and tau after adjustment for demographics, ApoEε4, 
cardiovascular disease, BMI, and total intracranial volume in the 
cross-sectional analysis. In the retrospective analysis, low ω-3 index was 
associated with greater Aβ accumulation (adjusted β = 0.02; 95% CI: 0.01, 0.03; 
P = 0.003). The composite cognitive score did not differ between groups; 
however, low ω-3 index was significantly associated with greater WMS-delayed 
recall cognitive decline (adjusted β = -1.18; 95% CI: -2.16, -0.19; P = 0.019), 
but unexpectedly lower total ADAS-Cog cognitive decline. Low ω-3 index was 
cross-sectionally associated with lower WMS performance (adjusted β = -1.81, 
SE = 0.73, P = 0.014) and higher tau accumulation among ApoE ε4 carriers.
CONCLUSIONS: Longitudinally, low ω-3 index was associated with greater Aβ 
accumulation and WMS cognitive decline but unexpectedly with lower total 
ADAS-Cog cognitive decline. Although no associations were cross-sectionally 
found in the whole population, low ω-3 index was associated with lower WMS 
cognition and higher tau accumulation among ApoE ε4 carriers. The Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) is registered at clinicaltrials.gov as 
NCT00106899.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Society for Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/nqac236
PMCID: PMC9761759
PMID: 36253968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Eur J Neurosci. 2024 Jul;60(1):3742-3758. doi: 10.1111/ejn.16376. Epub 2024 May 
2.

Predicting amyloid-PET and clinical conversion in apolipoprotein E ε3/ε3 
non-demented individuals with multidimensional factors.

Xu L(1), Ren C(1), Jing C(1), Wang G(2), Wei H(1), Kong M(3), Ba M(1)(4); for 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, the Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of 
Qingdao University, Shandong, China.
(2)School of Ulsan Ship and Ocean College, Ludong University, Yantai, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Yantaishan Hospital, Yantai City, Shandong, China.
(4)Yantai Regional Sub Center of National Center for Clinical Medical Research 
of Neurological Diseases, Shandong, China.

The apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 is a well-established risk factor of amyloid-β 
(Aβ) in Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, because of the high prevalence of 
APOE ε3, there may be a large number of people with APOE ε3/ε3 who are 
non-demented and have Aβ pathology. There are limited studies on assessing Aβ 
status and clinical conversion in the APOE ε3/ε3 non-demented population. Two 
hundred and ninety-three non-demented individuals with APOE ε3/ε3 from ADNI 
database were divided into Aβ-positron emission tomography (Aβ-PET) positivity 
(+) and Aβ-PET negativity (-) groups using cut-off value of >1.11. Stepwise 
regression searched for a single or multidimensional clinical variables for 
predicting Aβ-PET (+), and the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) 
assessed the accuracy of the predictive models. The Cox regression model 
explored the risk factors associated with clinical conversion to mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) or AD. The results showed that the combination of sex, 
education, ventricle and white matter hyperintensity (WMH) volume can accurately 
predict Aβ-PET status in cognitively normal (CN), and the combination of 
everyday cognition study partner total (EcogSPTotal) score, age, plasma p-tau 
181 and WMH can accurately predict Aβ-PET status in MCI individuals. EcogSPTotal 
score were independent predictors of clinical conversion to MCI or AD. The 
findings may provide a non-invasive and effective tool to improve the efficiency 
of screening Aβ-PET (+), accelerate and reduce costs of AD trial recruitment in 
future secondary prevention trials or help to select patients at high risk of 
disease progression in clinical trials.

© 2024 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ejn.16376
PMID: 38698692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2019 Oct 18;11(1):85. doi: 10.1186/s13195-019-0539-3.

Participant and study partner prediction and identification of cognitive 
impairment in preclinical Alzheimer's disease: study partner vs. participant 
accuracy.

Ryan MM(1), Grill JD(2)(3)(4)(5), Gillen DL(6)(7); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, 
92697, USA. marymr@uci.edu.
(2)Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, University of 
California, Irvine, 92697, CA, USA. jgrill@uci.edu.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA. jgrill@uci.edu.
(4)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, Irvine, 
Irvine, CA, 92697, USA. jgrill@uci.edu.
(5)Institute for Clinical and Translational Science, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA, 92697, USA. jgrill@uci.edu.
(6)Department of Statistics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, 
92697, USA. dgillen@uci.edu.
(7)Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, University of 
California, Irvine, 92697, CA, USA. dgillen@uci.edu.

BACKGROUND: Preclinical Alzheimer's disease (AD) clinical trials require 
participants to enroll with a study partner, a person who can attend visits and 
report changes in the participant's cognitive ability. Whether study partners, 
compared to participants themselves, provide added information about participant 
cognition in preclinical AD trials is an open question. We tested the hypothesis 
that study partners provide meaningful information related to participant 
cognition cross-sectionally and longitudinally, and assessed whether amyloid 
status modified observed effects.
METHODS: We assessed participant and study partner Everyday Cognition (ECog) 
scores and participant Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale 13-item cognitive 
subscale (ADAS13) data from 335 cognitively normal participant-partner dyads in 
the AD Neuroimaging Initiative. We used random forest and linear mixed effects 
(LME) models to predict ADAS13 scores as a function of participant and/or study 
partner ECog scores over time. LME models were adjusted for potential 
confounding factors, including APOE4 status, amyloid status, baseline age, years 
of education, and sex. Random forest models were split into the above factors, 
as well as race/ethnicity and other available neuropsychological battery test 
scores.
RESULTS: In random forest models predicting ADAS13 12 months from baseline, we 
observed no difference in the estimated mean variable importance (eMVI) 
associated with baseline study partner ECog compared to the baseline participant 
ECog (eMVI = 0.15, 95%CB 0.13, 0.16 for partner; eMVI = 0.15, 95%CB 0.14, 0.16 
for participant). In models predicting ADAS13 48 months after baseline, the eMVI 
associated with baseline study partner ECog was slightly lower than that 
associated with baseline participant ECog (eMVI = 0.21, 95%CB 0.20, 0.22 for 
partner; eMVI = 0.24, 95%CB 0.22, 0.25 for participant). In cross-sectional 
models, study partner eMVI was twice as large as participant eMVI at 12 months 
(eMVI = 0.20, 95%CB 0.19, 0.21 for partner; eMVI = 0.09, 95%CB 0.09, 0.10 for 
participant) and three times as large at 48 months (eMVI = 0.38, 95%CB 0.36, 
0.39 for partner; eMVI = 0.13, 95%CB 0.12, 0.14 for participant). We did not 
observe qualitative differences by amyloid status.
CONCLUSIONS: While baseline participant reports reasonably predict subsequent 
cognitive change, informants perform better at cross-sectionally recognizing 
cognitive status as observation time grows. The study partner requirement may be 
essential to ensure trial data integrity, especially in longer trials.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-019-0539-3
PMCID: PMC6800492
PMID: 31627738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


24. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Jan 28;13:772136. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.772136. 
eCollection 2021.

Intrinsic Brain Activity of Inferior Temporal Region Increased in Prodromal 
Alzheimer's Disease With Hearing Loss.

Hong L(1), Zeng Q(1), Li K(1), Luo X(1), Xu X(1), Liu X(1), Li Z(2), Fu Y(2), 
Wang Y(2), Zhang T(3), Chen Y(2), Liu Z(2), Huang P(1), Zhang M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, The 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Tongde Hospital of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, 
China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Hearing loss (HL) is one of the modifiable risk 
factors for Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the underlying mechanism behind 
HL in AD remains elusive. A possible mechanism is cognitive load hypothesis, 
which postulates that over-processing of degraded auditory signals in the 
auditory cortex leads to deficits in other cognitive functions. Given mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) is a prodromal stage of AD, untangling the 
association between HL and MCI might provide insights for potential mechanism 
behind HL.
METHODS: We included 85 cognitively normal (CN) subjects with no hearing loss 
(NHL), 24 CN with HL, 103 mild cognitive impairment (MCI) patients with NHL, and 
23 MCI with HL from the ADNI database. All subjects underwent resting-state 
functional MRI and neuropsychological scale assessments. Fractional amplitude of 
low-frequency fluctuation (fALFF) was used to reflect spontaneous brain 
activity. The mixed-effects analysis was applied to explore the interactive 
effects between HL and cognitive status (GRF corrected, voxel p-value <0.005, 
cluster p-value < 0.05, two-tailed). Then, the FDG data was included to further 
reflect the regional neuronal abnormalities. Finally, Pearson correlation 
analysis was performed between imaging metrics and cognitive scores to explore 
the clinical significance (Bonferroni corrected, p < 0.05).
RESULTS: The interactive effects primarily located in the left superior temporal 
gyrus (STG) and bilateral inferior temporal gyrus (ITG). Post-hoc analysis 
showed that NC with HL had lower fALFF in bilateral ITG compared to NC with NHL. 
NC with HL had higher fALFF in the left STG and decreased fALFF in bilateral ITG 
compared to MCI with HL. In addition, NC with HL had lower fALFF in the right 
ITG compared to MCI with NHL. Correlation analysis revealed that fALFF was 
associated with MMSE and ADNI-VS, while SUVR was associated with MMSE, MoCA, 
ADNI-EF and ADNI-Lan.
CONCLUSION: HL showed different effects on NC and MCI stages. NC had increased 
spontaneous brain activity in auditory cortex while decreased activity in the 
ITG. Such pattern altered with disease stage changing and manifested as 
decreased activity in auditory cortex along with increased activity in ITG in 
MCI. This suggested that the cognitive load hypothesis may be the underlying 
mechanism behind HL.

Copyright © 2022 Hong, Zeng, Li, Luo, Xu, Liu, Li, Fu, Wang, Zhang, Chen, Liu, 
Huang and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.772136
PMCID: PMC8831745
PMID: 35153717

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


25. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2024;11(6):1741-1750. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2024.109.

Performance of a Short Version of the Everyday Cognition Scale (ECog-12) to 
Detect Cognitive Impairment.

Manjavong M(1), Diaz A, Ashford MT, Aaronson A, Miller MJ, Kang JM, Mackin S, 
Tank R, Landavazo B, Truran D, Farias ST, Weiner M, Nosheny R.

Author information:
(1)Rachel L. Nosheny, Ph.D., Assistant Professor, University of California, San 
Francisco, Department of Psychiatry, San Francisco VA Medical Center, 4150 
Clement Street (114M), San Francisco, CA 94121, Tel: 650-468-0619, Fax: 
415-668-2864, email: rachel.nosheny@ucsf.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Everyday Cognition (ECog) 12-item scale, a functional decline 
measurement, can distinguish dementia from cognitively unimpaired (CU). Limited 
data compare ECog-12 performance by raters (self vs. informant) and scoring 
systems (average numeric vs. categorical grouping) to differentiate cognitive 
statuses.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the performance of ECog-12 in differentiation cognitive 
statuses.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional diagnostic test study.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: Data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) study are analyzed. Participants were aged 55-90 years old 
divided into subgroups based on diagnostic criteria.
MEASUREMENTS: We evaluated ECog-12 performance across different diagnostic 
groups, such as CU vs cognitive impairment (CI; mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 
and dementia), and the association between ECog-12 and CI. This procedure was 
repeated for self- and partner (informant)-reports. Additionally, types of ECog 
scores were also assessed, where an average ECog score was calculated 
(continuous numeric) as well as a categorical grouping ("any occasional 
declined" or "any consistently declined") based on item-level responses to ECog 
questions.
RESULTS: ECog-12 cut-off scores of 1.36 (self-reported) and 1.45 
(partner-reported) distinguish CU from CI with AUC 0.7 and 0.78, respectively. 
Adding a memory-concern question improved self-reported-ECog AUC to 0.79. Self- 
and partner-reported "consistently-declined" ECog-12 categorical grouping 
provided AUC 0.69 and 0.78. The study partner reported ECog-12 showed a greater 
association with CI than self-reported, with odds ratios of 35.45 and 8.79, 
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Study partner-reported ECog scores performed better than 
self-reported ECog-12 in differentiating cognitive statuses, and a higher study 
partner reported ECog score was a higher prognostic risk for CI. A memory 
concern question could enhance self-reported ECog-12 performance. This further 
emphasizes the need to obtain data from study partners for research and clinical 
practice.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2024.109
PMCID: PMC11573828
PMID: 39559885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MM – Dr. Manchumad Manjavong has no conflict of 
interest to declare. AD – Adam Diaz has no conflict of interest to declare. MTA 
- Dr. Miriam T. Ashford receives funding to her institution from NIH. AA – Anna 
Aaronson has no conflict of interest to declare. MJM – Dr. Melanie J. Miller has 
no conflict of interest to declare. JK – Dr. Jae Myeong Kang has no conflict of 
interest to declare. RSM – Dr. R. Scott Mackin has received research support 
from The National Institute of Mental Health, the National Institute of Aging, 
and Johnson and Johnson, during the past 2 years. RT – Dr. Rachana Tank has no 
conflict of interest to declare. BL – Bernard Landavazo has no conflict of 
interest to declare. DT – Diana Truran has no conflict of interest to declare. 
STF - Sarah Tomaszewski Farias received grant funding from the NIH, Alzheimer’s 
Association, and the California Dept of Public Health. MWW- Dr. Weiner reports 
grants from National Institutes of Health (NIH), grants from Department of 
Defense (DOD), grants from Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI), 
grants from California Department of Public Health (CDPH), grants from 
University of Michigan, grants from Siemens, grants from Biogen, grants from 
Hillblom Foundation, grants from Alzheimer’s Association, grants from The State 
of California, grants from Johnson & Johnson, grants from Kevin and Connie 
Shanahan, grants from GE, grants from VUmc, grants from Australian Catholic 
University (HBI- BHR), grants from The Stroke Foundation, grants from Veterans 
Administration, personal fees from Acumen Pharmaceutical, personal fees from 
Cerecin, personal fees from Dolby Family Ventures, personal fees from Eli Lilly, 
personal fees from Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., personal fees from National 
Institute on Aging (NIA), personal fees from Nestle/Nestec, personal fees from 
PCORI/PPRN, personal fees from Roche, personal fees from University of Southern 
California (USC), personal fees from NervGen, personal fees from Baird Equity 
Capital, personal fees from BioClinica, personal fees from Cytox, personal fees 
from Duke University, personal fees from Eisai, personal fees from 
FUJIFILM-Toyama Chemical (Japan), personal fees from Garfield Weston, personal 
fees from Genentech, personal fees from Guidepoint Global, personal fees from 
Indiana University, personal fees from Japanese Organization for Medical Device 
Development, Inc. (JOMDD), personal fees from Medscape, personal fees from 
Peerview Internal Medicine, personal fees from Roche, personal fees from T3D 
Therapeutics, personal fees from WebMD, personal fees from Vida Ventures, 
personal fees from The Buck Institute for Research on Aging, personal fees from 
China Association for Alzheimer’s Disease (CAAD), personal fees from Japan 
Society for Dementia Research, personal fees from Korean Dementia Society, 
outside the submitted work; and I hold stocks or options with Alzheon Inc., 
Alzeca, and Anven. RLN - Dr. Rachel L. Nosheny reports funding from the National 
Institutes of Health (grants to institution), California Department of Public 
Health (grants to institution), and Genentech Inc. (grants to institution).


26. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2023;10(2):212-222. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2023.13.

Longitudinal Exposure-Response Modeling of Multiple Indicators of Alzheimer's 
Disease Progression.

Polhamus DG(1), Dolton MJ, Rogers JA, Honigberg L, Jin JY, Quartino A.

Author information:
(1)Michael J. Dolton, Roche Products Pty Limited, Sydney, NSW, Australia; 
Telephone: +612 9454 9000; Email: michael.dolton@roche.com.

BACKGROUND: Progression in Alzheimer's disease manifests as changes in multiple 
biomarker, cognitive, and functional endpoints. Disease progression modeling can 
be used to integrate these multiple measures into a synthesized metric of where 
a patient lies within the disease spectrum, allowing for a more dynamic measure 
over the range of the disease.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to combine modeling techniques from psychometric 
research (e.g., item response theory) and pharmacometrics (e.g., hierarchical 
models) to describe the multivariate longitudinal disease progression for 
patients with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease. Additionally, we aimed to 
extend the subsequent model to make it suitable for clinical trial simulation, 
with the inclusion of covariates, to explain variability in latent progression 
(i.e., disease progression) and to aid in the assessment of enrichment 
strategies.
DESIGN: Multiple longitudinal endpoints in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative database were modeled. This model was validated internally using 
visual predictive checks, and externally by comparing data from the placebo arms 
of two Phase 2 crenezumab studies, ABBY (NCT01343966) and BLAZE (NCT01397578).
SETTING: The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative began in 2004: the 
initial 5-year study (ADNI-1) was extended by 2 years in 2009 by a Grand 
Opportunities grant (ADNI-GO), and in 2011 and 2016 by further competitive 
renewals of the ADNI-1 grant (ADNI-2 and ADNI-3, respectively). This work 
studies natural progression data from patients with confirmed Alzheimer's 
disease. The Phase 2 ABBY and BLAZE trials evaluated the safety and efficacy of 
crenezumab in patients with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease.
PARTICIPANTS: From the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative database, 305 
subjects who had a baseline diagnosis of mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease 
were included in modeling. From the ABBY and BLAZE studies, 158 patients were 
included from the studies' placebo arms.
MEASUREMENTS: Longitudinal cognitive and functional assessments modeled included 
the Clinical Dementia Rating (both as Sum of Boxes and individual item scores), 
the Mini-Mental State Examination, the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale - 
Cognitive Subscale, the Functional Activities Questionnaire, the Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment, and the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test. Also included 
were the imaging variable fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography and 
the following magnetic resonance imaging volumetrics: entorhinal, fusiform, 
hippocampal, intra-cranial, mid-temporal, ventricular, and whole brain.
RESULTS: Applying item response theory approaches in this longitudinal setting 
showed clinical assessments informing a common disease scale in the following 
order (from early disease to late disease): Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test, 
Functional Activities Questionnaire, Montreal Cognitive Assessment, Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale - Cognitive Subscale 12, Clinical Dementia Rating - Sum 
of Boxes, and Mini-Mental State Examination. The Clinical Dementia Rating 
communication and home-and-hobbies items were most informative at earlier 
disease stages, while memory, orientation, and personal care informed the 
disease status at later stages. A clinical trial simulation model was developed 
and accurately described within-sample longitudinal distribution of endpoints. 
Simplifying the model to use only baseline age, MMSE, and APOEε4 status as 
predictors, out-of-sample mean progression of ADAS-Cog and CDR Sum of Boxes in 
the ABBY and BLAZE placebo arms was accurately described; however, the 
variability in these endpoints was underpredicted and suggests possibility for 
further model refinement when extrapolating from the ADNI sample to trial data. 
Clinical trial simulations were performed to exemplify use of the model to 
investigate hypothetical disease modification effects on the multivariate, 
longitudinal progression on the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale - Cognitive 
Subscale and the Clinical Dementia Rating - Sum of Boxes.
CONCLUSIONS: The latent variable structure of item response theory can be 
extended to capture a variety of scales that are common assessments and 
indicators of disease status in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease. These 
models are not intended to support causal inferences, but they do successfully 
characterize the observed correlation between endpoints over time and result in 
concise numerical indices of disease status that reflect the totality of 
evidence from considering the endpoints jointly. As such, the models have 
utility for a variety of tasks in clinical trial design, including simulation of 
hypothetical drug effects, interpolation of missing data, and assessment of 
in-sample information.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2023.13
PMID: 36946448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DGP and JAR are employees of the Metrum Research 
group. MJD was an employee of Genentech, Inc., a member of the Roche Group, at 
the time of this work; he is now an employee of Roche Products Pty Limited, 
Sydney, Australia, and owns stock or stock options in F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. 
LAH and JYJ are employees of Genentech and own stock in F. Hoffmann-La Roche 
Ltd. AQ was an employee of Genentech, Inc. and owned stock in Roche Holding Ltd 
at the time of this study; she is now an employee of AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, 
Sweden.


27. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;73(2):759-768. doi: 10.3233/JAD-191005.

Associations of White Matter Hyperintensities with Cognitive Decline: A 
Longitudinal Study.

Wang YL(1), Chen W(1), Cai WJ(2), Hu H(1), Xu W(1), Wang ZT(1), Cao XP(3), Tan 
L(1), Yu JT(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(2)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Clinical Research Center, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.

White matter hyperintensities (WMHs), mainly caused by cerebrovascular injury, 
may lead to cognitive impairment. In order to identify whether the volume of 
WMHs is associated with cognitive decline over years, this longitudinal study 
involved 818 individuals from the ADNI-2 dataset from August 2010 to May 2017. 
Cross-sectional and longitudinal associations of WMHs with 8 cognitive domains 
were explored, using Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA), Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDRSB), Alzheimer 
Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive (ADAS-Cog13), Rey Auditory Verbal Learning 
Test (RAVLT), Functional Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ), executive function 
(ADNI-EF), and memory function (ADNI-Mem). The association analyses were 
performed using multiple linear regression models, linear mixed models, Spearman 
rank correlation, and Kaplan-Meier survival curves. The volumes of WMHs were 
greater in patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia compared with 
controls (p < 0.001) and mild cognitive impairment (p = 0.006) patients at 
baseline. The bigger volumes of WMHs correlated with worse performances on 
ADAS-Cog13 and ADNI-EF (p = 0.029; p = 0.003) at baseline and MMSE, MoCA, CDRSB, 
ADAS-Cog13, FAQ, and ADNI-Mem (overall p < 0.05) longitudinally, after adjusting 
for age, sex, educational level, apolipoprotein E ɛ4 genotype, hypertension, 
hyperlipidemia, diabetes, smoking, infarction, and diagnosis. Additionally, the 
correlations between the change rate of WMHs and change rates of MMSE, MoCA, 
CDRSB, FAQ, ADNI-EF, and ADNI-Mem were statistically significant. Furthermore, 
patients with high WMH volumes showed an increased likelihood of dementia. The 
results of the study suggest that WMH volume is associated with cognitive 
decline, and it contributes to the conversion to AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-191005
PMID: 31839612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2022 Dec;44(10):703-712. doi: 
10.1080/13803395.2023.2167942. Epub 2023 Feb 20.

Predicting conversion of patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer's 
disease using bedside cognitive assessments.

Clarke A(1), Ashe C(1), Jenkinson J(1), Rowe O(1), A D N I(1), Hyland P(1), 
Commins S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Ireland.

INTRODUCTION: Patients diagnosed with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) often go 
on to develop dementia, however many do not. Although cognitive tests are widely 
used in the clinic, there is limited research on their potential to help predict 
which patients may progress to Alzheimer's disease (AD) from those that do not.
METHODS: MCI patients (n = 325) from the longitudinal Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI-2) dataset were tracked across a 5 year period. 
Upon initial diagnosis, all patients underwent a series of cognitive tests 
including the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA) and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive (ADAS-Cog 
13). Twenty-five percent (n = 83) of those initially diagnosed with MCI 
subsequently developed AD within 5 years.
RESULTS: We showed that those individuals that progressed to AD had 
significantly lower scores upon baseline testing on the MMSE and MoCA, and 
higher scores on the ADAS-13, compared to those that did not convert. However, 
not all tests were equivalent. We showed that the ADAS-13 offers the best 
predictability of conversion (Adjusted Odds ratio (AOR) = 3.91). This 
predictability was higher than that offered by the two primary biomarker 
Amyloid-beta (Aβ, AOR = 1.99) and phospho-tau (Ptau, AOR = 1.72). Further 
analysis on the ADAS-13 showed that MCI patients that subsequently converted to 
AD performed particularly poorly on delayed-recall (AOR = 1.93), word 
recognition (AOR = 1.66), word finding difficulty (AOR = 1.55) and orientation 
(1.38) test items.
CONCLUSIONS: Cognitive testing using the ADAS-13 may offer a simpler, less 
invasive, more clinically relevant and a more effective method of determining 
those that are in danger of converting from MCI to AD.

DOI: 10.1080/13803395.2023.2167942
PMID: 36803664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. BMC Geriatr. 2015 Sep 7;15:107. doi: 10.1186/s12877-015-0103-3.

Relationship between the Montreal Cognitive Assessment and Mini-mental State 
Examination for assessment of mild cognitive impairment in older adults.

Trzepacz PT(1), Hochstetler H(2), Wang S(3), Walker B(4), Saykin AJ(5); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Shaw 
LM, Khachaturian Z, Sorensen G, Carrillo M, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies 
P, Fillit H, Hefti F, Holtzman D, Mesulam M, Potter W, Snyder P, Schwartz A, 
Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, San, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, 
Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, Balasubramanian AB, Mason J, Sim I, Beckett L, 
Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, 
DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Vemuri P, Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward 
C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Morris 
JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Taylor-Reinwald L, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, 
Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin 
S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Thal L, Khachaturian Z, Thal L, 
Buckholtz N, Weiner MW, Snyder PJ, Potter W, Paul S, Albert M, Frank R, 
Consulting RF, Khachaturian Z, Hsiao J, Kaye J, Quinn J, Silbert L, Lind B, 
Carter R, Dolen S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Teodoro L, Spann BM, 
Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Fleisher A, Heidebrink JL, Lord JL, Petersen R, Mason 
SS, Albers CS, Knopman D, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Chowdhury M, 
Rountree S, Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Ances B, Morris JC, Carroll M, 
Creech ML, Franklin E, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Oliver A, Marson D, Griffith R, 
Clark D, Geldmacher D, Brockington J, Roberson E, Love MN, Grossman H, Mitsis E, 
Shah RC, deToledo-Morrell L, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Roberts P, Albert M, 
Onyike C, D'Agostino D 2nd, Kielb S, Galvin JE, Cerbone B, Michel CA, Pogorelec 
DM, Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, Glodzik L, De Santi S, Doraiswamy P, Petrella JR, 
Borges-Neto S, Wong TZ, Coleman E, Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk D, Clark CM, 
Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, Sinha P, Oates E, Conrad G, Lopez OL, Oakley M, 
Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein BS, Martin K, Makino KM, Ismail M, Brand 
C, Mulnard RA, Thai G, Mc-Adams-Ortiz C, Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Levey 
AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Swerdlow RH, Brooks WM, Apostolova L, Tingus K, 
Woo E, Silverman DH, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Kendall T, 
Johnson H, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews BR, Brosch JR, Herring S, Hunt C, van 
Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Varma P, Chertkow H, Bergman H, Hosein C, Black 
S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GY, Feldman H, Mudge B, Assaly M, Finger E, 
Pasternack S, Rachisky I, Trost D, Kertesz A, Bernick C, Munic D, Mesulam MM, 
Lipowski K, Weintraub S, Bonakdarpour B, Kerwin D, Wu CK, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, 
Villena T, Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall 
G, Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh MN, Belden CM, 
Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, 
Obisesan TO, Wolday S, Allard J, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Tatsuoka C, Fatica P, 
Fletcher E, Maillard P, Olichney J, DeCarli C, Carmichael O, Kittur S, Borrie M, 
Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen 
D, Tariot P, Burke A, Trncic N, Fleisher A, Reeder S, Bates V, Capote H, Rainka 
M, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Adeli A, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, Brown AD, 
Neuropsychiatry O, Pearlson GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Flashman LA, Seltzer M, 
Hynes ML, Santulli RB, Sink KM, Gordineer L, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, 
Ott BR, Querfurth H, Tremont G, Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, 
Miller BL, Perry D, Mintzer J, Spicer K, Bachman D, Finger E, Pasternak S, 
Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, Drost D, Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, 
Schultz SK, Ponto LL, Shim H, Smith KE, Relkin N, Chaing G, Lin M, Ravdin L, 
Smith A, Raj BA, Fargher K, Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, 
Green RC, Harvey D, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Morris JC, Saykin AJ, Shaw LM, Toga 
AW, Trojanowki JQ, Neylan T, Grafman J, Green RC, Montine T, Weiner M, Petersen 
R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Gessert D, Sather T, Davis M, Morrison R, 
Jiminez G, Neylan T, Hayes J, Finley S, Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, 
Bernstein M, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Kantarci K, Ward C, Jagust W, 
Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Landau S, Morris JC, Cairns NJ, 
Householder E, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga AW, 
Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, Nho 
K, Weiner MW, Friedl K, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Brewer J, 
Vanderswag H, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Fleischman D, Arfanakis K, Shah RC, 
Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Doraiswamy P, Petrella JR, James O, Porsteinsson AP, 
Goldstein B, Martin KS, Mulnard RA, Thai G, McAdams-Ortiz C, Mintzer J, 
Massoglia D, Brawman-Mintzer O, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Jagust W, 
Landau S, Rosen H, Perry D, Turner RS, Behan K, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, 
Marshall G, Sabbagh MN, Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Obisesan TO, Allard J, Johnson 
SC, Fruehling J, Harding S, Peskind ER, Petrie EC, Li G, Yesavage JA, Taylor JL, 
Furst AJ, Chao S, Relkin N, Chaing G, Ravdin L.

Author information:
(1)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. 
pttrzepacz@outlook.com.
(2)Eli Lilly and Company or one of its subsidiaries, Lilly Corporate Center, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA. hochstetler_helen_m@lilly.com.
(3)Eli Lilly and Company or one of its subsidiaries, Lilly Corporate Center, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA. wang_shufang@lilly.com.
(4)University College of London, Gower Street, London, UK. 
brett.walker.14@ucl.ac.uk.
(5)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. 
asaykin@iupui.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) was developed to enable 
earlier detection of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) relative to familiar 
multi-domain tests like the Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE). Clinicians need to 
better understand the relationship between MoCA and MMSE scores.
METHODS: For this cross-sectional study, we analyzed 219 healthy control (HC), 
299 MCI, and 100 Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia cases from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)-GO/2 database to evaluate MMSE and MoCA 
score distributions and select MoCA values to capture early and late MCI cases. 
Stepwise variable selection in logistic regression evaluated relative value of 
four test domains for separating MCI from HC. Functional Activities 
Questionnaire (FAQ) was evaluated as a strategy to separate dementia from MCI. 
Equi-percentile equating produced a translation grid for MoCA against MMSE 
scores. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analyses evaluated lower cutoff 
scores for capturing the most MCI cases.
RESULTS: Most dementia cases scored abnormally, while MCI and HC score 
distributions overlapped on each test. Most MCI cases scored ≥ 17 on MoCA 
(96.3%) and ≥ 24 on MMSE (98.3%). The ceiling effect (28-30 points) for MCI and 
HC was less using MoCA (18.1%) versus MMSE (71.4%). MoCA and MMSE scores 
correlated most for dementia (r = 0.86; versus MCI r = 0.60; HC r = 0.43). 
Equi-percentile equating showed a MoCA score of 18 was equivalent to MMSE of 24. 
ROC analysis found MoCA ≥ 17 as the cutoff between MCI and dementia that 
emphasized high sensitivity (92.3%) to capture MCI cases. The core and 
orientation domains in both tests best distinguished HC from MCI groups, whereas 
comprehension/executive function and attention/calculation were not helpful. 
Mean FAQ scores were significantly higher and a greater proportion had abnormal 
FAQ scores in dementia than MCI and HC.
CONCLUSIONS: MoCA and MMSE were more similar for dementia cases, but MoCA 
distributes MCI cases across a broader score range with less ceiling effect. A 
cutoff of ≥ 17 on the MoCA may help capture early and late MCI cases; depending 
on the level of sensitivity desired, ≥ 18 or 19 could be used. Functional 
assessment can help exclude dementia cases. MoCA scores are translatable to the 
MMSE to facilitate comparison.

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-015-0103-3
PMCID: PMC4562190
PMID: 26346644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2014 Sep;20(8):836-47. doi: 10.1017/S135561771400068X. 
Epub 2014 Aug 26.

Subjective cognitive complaints contribute to misdiagnosis of mild cognitive 
impairment.

Edmonds EC(1), Delano-Wood L(1), Galasko DR(1), Salmon DP(2), Bondi MW(1); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Trojanowki 
JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Shaw LM, Khachaturian Z, 
Sorensen G, Carrillo M, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies P, Fillit H, Hefti 
F, Holtzman D, Mesulam M, Potter W, Snyder P, Schwartz A, Green RC, Montine T, 
Petersen R, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, 
Beckett L, Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Fox N, Thompson P, 
Schuff N, DeCarli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Vemuri P, Jones D, Kantarci 
K, Ward C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, 
Morris JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Taylor-Reinwald L, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, 
Lee V, Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, 
Potkin S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Thal L, Khachaturian Z, Thal L, 
Buckholtz N, Snyder PJ, Potter W, Paul S, Albert M, Frank R, Khachaturian Z, 
Hsiao J, Kaye J, Quinn J, Lind B, Carter R, Dolen S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, 
Beccera M, Teodoro L, Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Fleisher A, Heidebrink 
JL, Lord JL, Petersen R, Mason SS, Albers CS, Knopman D, Johnson K, Doody RS, 
Villanueva-Meyer J, Chowdhury M, Rountree S, Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, 
Ances B, Morris JC, Carroll M, Leon S, Householder E, Mintun MA, Schneider S, 
Oliver A, Marson D, Griffith R, Clark D, Geldmacher D, Brockington J, Roberson 
E, Grossman H, Mitsis E, deToledo-Morrell L, Shah RC, Duara R, Varon D, Greig 
MT, Roberts P, Albert M, Onyike C, D'Agostino D 2nd, Kielb S, Galvin JE, 
Pogorelec DM, Cerbone B, Michel CA, Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, Glodzik L, De Santi 
S, Doraiswamy P, Petrella JR, Wong TZ, Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk D, Smith 
CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, Sinha P, Oates E, Conrad G, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson 
DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein BS, Martin K, Makino KM, Ismail M, Brand C, 
Mulnard RA, Thai G, Mc-Adams-Ortiz C, Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, 
Diaz-Arrastia R, King R, Weiner M, Martin-Cook K, DeVous M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, 
Cellar JS, Burns JM, Anderson HS, Swerdlow RH, Apostolova L, Tingus K, Woo E, 
Silverman DH, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Kendall T, 
Johnson H, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews BR, Herring S, Hunt C, van Dyck CH, 
Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Chertkow H, Bergman H, Hosein C, Black S, Stefanovic B, 
Caldwell C, Hsiung GY, Feldman H, Mudge B, Assaly M, Kertesz A, Rogers J, Trost 
D, Bernick C, Munic D, Kerwin D, Mesulam MM, Lipowski K, Wu CK, Johnson N, 
Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling 
RA, Johnson KA, Marshall G, Frey M, Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Lane B, Rosen A, 
Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh MN, Belden CM, Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Kowall N, Killiany 
R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, Obisesan TO, Wolday S, Allard J, Lerner A, 
Ogrocki P, Hudson L, Fletcher E, Carmichael O, Olichney J, DeCarli C, Kittur S, 
Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda 
A, Nguyen D, Tariot P, Fleisher A, Reeder S, Bates V, Capote H, Rainka M, 
Scharre DW, Kataki M, Adeli A, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, Brown AD, 
Neuropsychiatry O, Pearlson GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Santulli RB, Kitzmiller TJ, 
Schwartz ES, Sink KM, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Querfurth H, 
Tremont G, Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Mintzer J, 
Spicer K, Bachman D, Finger E, Pasternak S, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, 
Drost D, Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, Schultz SK, Ponto LL, Shim H, Smith 
KE, Relkin N, Chaing G, Raudin L, Smith A, Fargher K, Raj BA, Petersen R, Green 
RC, Harvey D, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Morris JC, Saykin AJ, Shaw LM, Trojanowki 
JQ, Neylan T, Grafman J, Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Thomas RG, Donohue M, 
Sather T, Davis M, Morrison R, Jiminez G, Neylan T, Hayes J, Finley S, Harvey D, 
Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Kantarci K, Jagust W, 
Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Landau S, Morris JC, Cairns NJ, 
Householder E, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga AW, 
Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, Nho 
K, Weiner MW, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Stern Y, Honig LS, 
Bell KL, Fleischman D, Arfanakis K, Shah RC, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, 
Doraiswamy P, Petrella JR, James O, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein B, Martin KS, 
Mulnard RA, Thai G, McAdams-Ortiz C, Mintzer J, Massoglia D, Brawman-Mintzer O, 
Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Jagust W, Landau S, Turner RS, Behan K, 
Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall G, Sabbagh MN, Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, 
Obisesan TO, Wolday S, Allard J, Johnson SC, Fruehling J, Harding S, Peskind ER, 
Petrie EC, Li G, Yesavage JA, Taylor JL, Furst AJ, Relkin N, Chaing G, Ravdin L.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Psychiatry,University of California San Diego,School of 
Medicine,La Jolla,California.
(2)3Department of Neurosciences,University of California San Diego,School of 
Medicine,La Jolla,California.

Subjective cognitive complaints are a criterion for the diagnosis of mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI), despite their uncertain relationship to objective 
memory performance in MCI. We aimed to examine self-reported cognitive 
complaints in subgroups of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) MCI cohort to determine whether they are a valuable inclusion in the 
diagnosis of MCI or, alternatively, if they contribute to misdiagnosis. 
Subgroups of MCI were derived using cluster analysis of baseline 
neuropsychological test data from 448 ADNI MCI participants. Cognitive 
complaints were assessed via the Everyday Cognition (ECog) questionnaire, and 
discrepancy scores were calculated between self- and informant-report. Cluster 
analysis revealed Amnestic and Mixed cognitive phenotypes as well as a third 
Cluster-Derived Normal subgroup (41.3%), whose neuropsychological and 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Alzheimer's disease (AD) biomarker profiles did not 
differ from a "robust" normal control group. This cognitively intact phenotype 
of MCI participants overestimated their cognitive problems relative to their 
informant, whereas Amnestic MCI participants with objective memory impairment 
underestimated their cognitive problems. Underestimation of cognitive problems 
was associated with positive CSF AD biomarkers and progression to dementia. 
Overall, there was no relationship between self-reported cognitive complaints 
and objective cognitive functioning, but significant correlations were observed 
with depressive symptoms. The inclusion of self-reported complaints in MCI 
diagnostic criteria may cloud rather than clarify diagnosis and result in high 
rates of misclassification of MCI. Discrepancies between self- and 
informant-report demonstrate that overestimation of cognitive problems is 
characteristic of normal aging while underestimation may reflect greater risk 
for cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.1017/S135561771400068X
PMCID: PMC4172502
PMID: 25156329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Neurology. 2023 Jun 13;100(24):e2454-e2465. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000207338. 
Epub 2023 Apr 21.

Association of the Informant-Reported Memory Decline With Cognitive and Brain 
Deterioration Through the Alzheimer Clinical Continuum.

Kuhn E(1), Perrotin A(1), La Joie R(1), Touron E(1), Dautricourt S(1), Vanhoutte 
M(1), Vivien D(1), de La Sayette V(1), Chételat G(2); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)From the Normandie Univ (E.K., A.P., E.T., S.D., M.V., D.V., G.C.), UNICAEN, 
INSERM, U1237, PhIND "Physiopathology and Imaging of Neurological Disorders," 
Institut Blood and Brain @ Caen-Normandie, Cyceron, France; Memory and Aging 
Center (R.L.J.), Department of Neurology, Weill Institute for Neurosciences, 
University of California, San Francisco; Département de Recherche Clinique 
(D.V.), CHU Caen-Normandie; and Service de Neurologie (V.d.L.S.), CHU de Caen, 
France.
(2)From the Normandie Univ (E.K., A.P., E.T., S.D., M.V., D.V., G.C.), UNICAEN, 
INSERM, U1237, PhIND "Physiopathology and Imaging of Neurological Disorders," 
Institut Blood and Brain @ Caen-Normandie, Cyceron, France; Memory and Aging 
Center (R.L.J.), Department of Neurology, Weill Institute for Neurosciences, 
University of California, San Francisco; Département de Recherche Clinique 
(D.V.), CHU Caen-Normandie; and Service de Neurologie (V.d.L.S.), CHU de Caen, 
France. chetelat@cyceron.fr.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Studies are sparse regarding the association between 
the informant-reported subjective memory decline (informant report) and 
Alzheimer disease (AD) biomarkers. This study thus aimed at determining the 
clinical relevance of the informant report throughout the AD clinical continuum, 
by assessing its specific relationships with amyloid deposition, cognition, and 
neurodegeneration.
METHODS: Participants from the Imagerie Multimodale de la maladie d'Alzheimer à 
un stade Précoce (IMAP+) primary cohort and the Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) replication cohort were included; all underwent multimodal 
neuroimaging and neuropsychological assessments. Follow-up data of IMAP+ 
participants over up to 36 months were also used for longitudinal analyses. The 
informant report was measured with the Cognitive Difficulties Scale (IMAP+) and 
Everyday Cognition (ADNI). General linear models were used to assess the 
cross-sectional associations between the informant report and amyloid-PET, 
cognitive performances, and neurodegeneration (atrophy and hypometabolism) in 
Alzheimer signature areas; while longitudinal links were assessed in IMAP+ with 
linear mixed-effects models.
RESULTS: A total of 110 IMAP+ participants were included, including 32 
cognitively unimpaired older individuals (controls, age: 70.91 ± 6.57 years, 
female: 50%), 25 patients with subjective cognitive decline (SCD, 65.88 ± 6.64, 
40%), 35 with mild cognitive impairment (MCI, 72.49 ± 7.5, 34%), and 18 with 
Alzheimer-type dementia (AD dementia, 68.17 ± 8.59, 28%). Seven hundred 
thirty-one ADNI participants were included, including 157 controls (74.21 ± 
5.95, 55%), 84 with SCD (72.00 ± 5.41, 63%), 369 with MCI (71.84 ± 7.4, 44%), 
and 121 with AD dementia (74.29 ± 7.75, 40%). In IMAP+, a higher informant 
report strongly correlated to greater amyloid-PET, specifically in patients with 
MCI (β = 0.48, p = 0.003), and to lower cognitive performance in patients with 
SCD (global cognition, β = -0.41, p = 0.04) and MCI (memory, β = -0.37, p = 
0.03). Findings in patients with MCI were replicated in the ADNI (amyloid-PET, β 
= 0.25, p < 0.001; memory, β = -0.22, p < 0.001) and extended to 
neurodegeneration in AD signature areas (β = -0.2, p < 0.001). Longitudinal 
analyses in IMAP+ showed links with global cognitive decline over time in 
patients with MCI (estimate -0.74, SE 0.26, p = 0.005) and SCD (estimate -0.36, 
SE 0.26, p = 0.02) where a higher baseline informant report also predicted an 
increased amyloid-PET over time (estimate 0.008, SE 0.003, p = 0.02).
DISCUSSION: Altogether, our findings suggest that the informant report is 
particularly relevant in patients with MCI where it strongly relates to higher 
amyloid-PET, indicative of impairment due to AD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION INFORMATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01638949.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000207338
PMCID: PMC10264050
PMID: 37085328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: E. Kuhn was funded by the University of Caen 
Normandy, INSERM, and the Fondation Philippe Chatrier. A. Perrotin, R. La Joie, 
E. Touron, S. Dautricourt, M. Vanhoutte, D. Vivien, and V. de La Sayette report 
no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. G. Chételat has received research 
support from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program 
(grant agreement number 667696), Fondation d'entreprise MMA des Entrepreneurs du 
Futur, Fondation Alzheimer, Programme Hospitalier de Recherche Clinique, Agence 
Nationale de la Recherche, Région Normandie, Association France Alzheimer et 
maladies apparentées, Fondation Vaincre Alzheimer, and Fondation Recherche 
Alzheimer and Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale (all to Inserm) and personal 
fees from Inserm, GE Healthcare, Fondation Alzheimer, and Fondation d'entreprise 
MMA des Entrepreneurs du Futur. Go to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures.


32. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2020 May;35(5):581-588. doi: 10.1002/gps.5274. Epub 
2020 Feb 21.

Memory impairment and Alzheimer's disease pathology in individuals with MCI who 
underestimate or overestimate their decline.

Bregman N(1)(2), Kavé G(1)(3), Zeltzer E(1), Biran I(1); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neurology Unit, Neurological Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical 
Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Department of Education and Psychology, The Open University, Ra'anana, 
Israel.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to examine whether the discrepancy between 
participant and informant estimation of memory decline can predict MCI 
prognosis.
METHODS: Analyses involved data from individuals with MCI enrolled in the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) who filled the Everyday 
Cognition questionnaire. Participants who underestimated (N = 112) and 
overestimated (N = 157) their memory decline were compared on memory tasks, 
brain volume, and cerebrospinal markers, at study entry and after 24 months.
RESULTS: Individuals who underestimated their memory decline performed more 
poorly on memory tests, had smaller hippocampus volume, and greater Alzheimer's 
disease pathology than did individuals who overestimated their cognitive 
decline. Longitudinal comparisons demonstrated that individuals who 
underestimated their decline deteriorated more significantly in memory and in 
brain measures.
CONCLUSIONS: Underestimation of memory decline should raise clinicians' 
suspicion of the existence of AD pathology in individuals with MCI.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.5274
PMID: 32011757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Environ Res. 2025 Jan 1;264(Pt 2):120304. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2024.120304. 
Epub 2024 Nov 6.

DNA methylation biomarkers for cumulative lead exposures and cognitive 
impairment.

Shao K(1), Yu Y(2), Ritz B(3), Paul KC(4); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA; Center for Health Policy Research, UCLA Fielding School of 
Public Health, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Environmental Health Sciences, UCLA Fielding 
School of Public Health, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Neurology, UCLA 
David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA. Electronic address: kimberlp@ucla.edu.

BACKGROUND: Recent evidence suggests that cumulative low-level lead exposure has 
adverse effects on cognitive function in the elderly. To date, the few studies 
that have measured bone lead exposure relied on K-X-ray fluorescence (KXRF), 
methods that are mostly unavailable in large community-based studies. Here, we 
employ a methylation-based estimation method for bone and blood lead in the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort.
METHODS: Tibia, patella, and blood lead levels were estimated using blood DNA 
methylation (DNAm) biomarkers in 625 participants from the ADNI cohort. 
Cognitive function was assessed using the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA). 
Longitudinal analyses were conducted using linear mixed-effect regression 
models. Participants had different years of baseline (2010-2014) and follow-up 
visits (2014-2015).
RESULTS: DNAm derived tibia and patella lead levels were negatively associated 
with MoCA scores throughout follow-up, while DNAm derived blood lead level was 
not associated with MoCA scores. On average, we observed lower MoCA scores with 
increasing DNAm tibia lead (per interquartile range (IQR): β = -0.23; 95% CI: 
-0.44, -0.03) and DNAm patella lead, albeit the latter was weaker (per IQR: 
β = -0.19; 95% CI: -0.41, 0.04). When stratifying by gender, women showed a 
stronger decrease in cognitive function with increasing DNAm tibia lead (per IQR 
β = -0.34; 95% CI: -0.65, -0.04) than men (per IQR β = -0.15; 95% CI: -0.42, 
0.13). The estimated decrease in MoCA scores per DNAm tibia lead IQR increase 
was stronger among participants with one or two APOE4 alleles (per IQR 
β = -0.37; 95% CI: -0.74, -0.01) than those with zero alleles (per IQR 
β = -0.14; 95% CI: -0.38, 0.10).
CONCLUSION: These findings strengthen the evidence that cumulative long-term 
lead exposure levels are associated with decreased cognitive function in the 
elderly, especially among women and carriers of one or two APOE4 alleles. These 
findings based on whole blood methylation data corroborate previous 
epidemiologic studies that used KXRF for measuring bone lead.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2024.120304
PMID: 39510227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


34. Eur Radiol. 2021 Dec;31(12):9324-9334. doi: 10.1007/s00330-021-08086-3. Epub 
2021 Jun 9.

Brain connectivity markers in advanced Parkinson's disease for predicting mild 
cognitive impairment.

Lin H(#)(1)(2)(3), Liu Z(#)(1)(4), Yan W(5), Zhang D(1)(3), Liu J(1)(3), Xu 
B(1)(3), Li W(1)(2)(3), Zhang Q(6)(7), Cai X(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, The First 
Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University, 3002# Sungang West Road, Futian 
District, Shenzhen, 518035, China.
(2)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Neurosurgery, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, 
The First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Shenzhen University School of Medicine, Shenzhen, China.
(4)Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, Guangdong, China.
(5)Brain Cognition and Brain Disease Institute, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced 
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, The First 
Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University, 3002# Sungang West Road, Futian 
District, Shenzhen, 518035, China. shinezqs@163.com.
(7)Shenzhen University School of Medicine, Shenzhen, China. shinezqs@163.com.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, The First 
Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University, 3002# Sungang West Road, Futian 
District, Shenzhen, 518035, China. 13632660199@139.com.
(9)Shenzhen University School of Medicine, Shenzhen, China. 13632660199@139.com.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a well-defined non-motor 
manifestation and a harbinger of dementia in Parkinson's disease. This study is 
to investigate brain connectivity markers of MCI using diffusion tensor imaging 
and resting-state functional MRI, and help MCI diagnosis in PD patients.
METHODS: We evaluated 131 advanced PD patients (disease duration > 5 years; 59 
patients with MCI) and 48 healthy control subjects who underwent a 
diffusion-weighted and resting-state functional MRI scanning. The patients were 
randomly assigned to training (n = 100) and testing (n = 31) groups. According 
to the Brainnetome Atlas, ROI-based structural and functional connectivity 
analysis was employed to extract connectivity features. To identify features 
with significant discriminative power for patient classification, all features 
were put into an all-relevant feature selection procedure within 
cross-validation loops.
RESULTS: Nine features were identified to be significantly relevant to patient 
classification. They showed significant differences between PD patients with and 
without MCI and positively correlated with the MoCA score. Five of them did not 
differ between general MCI subjects and healthy controls from the ADNI database, 
which suggested that they could uniquely play a part in the MCI diagnosis of PD. 
On basis of these relevant features, the random forest model constructed from 
the training group achieved an accuracy of 83.9% in the testing group, to 
discriminate patients with and without MCI.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of our study provide preliminary evidence that 
structural and functional connectivity abnormalities may contribute to cognitive 
impairment and allow to predict the outcome of MCI diagnosis in PD.
KEY POINTS: • Nine MCI markers were identified using an all-relevant feature 
selection procedure. • Five of nine markers differed between MCI and NC in PD, 
but not in general persons. • A random forest model achieved an accuracy of 
83.9% for MCI diagnosis in PD.

© 2021. European Society of Radiology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00330-021-08086-3
PMID: 34109485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Neurol Lett. 2023 Apr;2(1):35-41. doi: 10.52547/nl.2.1.35. Epub 2022 Apr 15.

COVID-19 vaccine-hesitancy is associated with lower cortical volume in elderly 
individuals.

Nabizadeh F(1)(2); Alzheimer’s disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Group (NRG), Universal Scientific Education and 
Research Network (USERN), Tehran, Iran.
(2)School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: According to a large number of scientific reports, the main problem 
is COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy which slowed down the vaccination program. 
Previous studies revealed that COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy is associated with 
lower cognitive performance. However, the neurobiology of such behavior is less 
known, and investigating the brain structural patterns in this regard can extend 
our knowledge on the basis of this behavior. This study aimed to investigate the 
link between brain structural features including cortical and subcortical volume 
with COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy in elderly individuals.
METHODS: A total of 221 healthy subjects without any cognitive impairment with a 
mean age of 63.7 ± 6.1 were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) database. Overall, 87 vaccine-hesitant (VH) and 134 
vaccine-accepted (VA) were entered into this study. The difference in the volume 
of cortical and subcortical regions was investigated between VH and VA groups.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference in cognitive status measured by 
MMSE, MoCA, ADAS-cog, and RAVLT between VA and VH groups (P>0.05). The analysis 
showed that VA subjects had significantly higher left pars orbitalis (P: 0.013), 
left precentral (P: 0.042), right caudal anterior cingulate (P: 0.044), and 
right isthmus cingulate (P: 0.013) volume compared to the VH group. There was no 
significant difference in other cortical and subcortical regions.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, this finding demonstrated that in the era of 
complicated decision-making due to social media reports, elderly adults with 
smaller frontal and cingulate regions are more likely to be vaccine-hesitant. 
These findings can highlight the link between cortical regions and 
health-protective behaviors such as taking up the offer of vaccination.

DOI: 10.52547/nl.2.1.35
PMCID: PMC10847881
PMID: 38327486

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The author declares no 
conflict of interest regarding the publication of this paper.


36. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2019 Apr;34(4):548-554. doi: 10.1002/gps.5049. Epub 
2018 Dec 21.

Dissociation in awareness of memory and language decline in Alzheimer's disease.

Bregman N(1)(2), Kavé G(1)(3), Shiner T(1)(2)(4)(5), Biran I(1); Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Center for Memory and Attention Disorders, Neurological Institute, Tel Aviv 
Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Department of Education and Psychology, The Open University, Ra'anana, 
Israel.
(4)Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(5)Movement Disorders Unit, Neurological Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical 
Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to examine awareness of decline in memory 
and in language in individuals with Alzheimer's disease (AD), by comparing 
participant and informant ratings, as well as these ratings and actual test 
performance.
METHODS: We analyzed data from 149 individuals with AD enrolled in the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) who filled the Everyday 
Cognition questionnaire and performed memory and language tasks.
RESULTS: Participants provided significantly lower assessments of decline than 
did informants for both memory and language. There was a negative association 
between informant ratings and memory test scores but no association between 
participant ratings and memory test scores. Both participant and informant 
ratings correlated negatively with performance on the language tests. Informant, 
but not participant, ratings contributed to the prediction of one memory 
variable beyond demographic factors. Participant ratings contributed to the 
prediction of language scores beyond demographic factors more than did informant 
ratings.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings reflect better awareness of decline in language than 
of decline in memory in individuals with AD.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.5049
PMID: 30548691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2021 Jun 25;13(1):118. doi: 10.1186/s13195-021-00856-x.

Pathological correlates of impaired self-awareness of memory function in 
Alzheimer's disease.

Gagliardi G(1)(2)(3), Kuppe M(4), Lois C(4)(5), Hanseeuw B(4)(5), Vannini 
P(6)(4)(5); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. ggagliardi@bwh.harvard.edu.
(2)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. ggagliardi@bwh.harvard.edu.
(3)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. ggagliardi@bwh.harvard.edu.
(4)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Impaired self-awareness of memory function, a.k.a. anosognosia, is 
a common symptom in Alzheimer's disease (AD); however, its pathological 
correlates remain unclear. Here, we investigated the impact of amyloid and tau 
on memory self-awareness.
METHODS: Two hundred thirty-six clinically normal (N) and 102 impaired (I) 
participants from the ADNI cohort were included. Amyloid (global) and tau burden 
(in entorhinal and inferior temporal cortices) were assessed using positron 
emission tomography (PET). Self-awareness of memory was assessed using 
discrepancy indexes of subjective participant-informant ratings, as well as 
participant-objective scores of memory performance. Subjective and objective 
values were derived from the Everyday Cognition memory questionnaire and Logical 
Memory (delayed recall).
RESULTS: Lower awareness (both methods) of memory function was associated with 
higher levels of pathology in the I group as compared to N. There was a 
significant effect of tauopathy, but not amyloidosis, on individual complaint, 
such that higher levels of tau associated with lower awareness.
DISCUSSION: Impaired self-awareness appears progressively in the evolution of 
the disease related to AD biomarkers. Discordant subjective and objective 
measures may be important for clinical consideration.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-021-00856-x
PMCID: PMC8234669
PMID: 34172086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


38. Med Phys. 2024 Jun;51(6):4105-4120. doi: 10.1002/mp.16984. Epub 2024 Feb 19.

An effective and robust lattice Boltzmann model guided by atlas for hippocampal 
subregions segmentation.

Liu Y(1)(2)(3), Wang M(2), Yu X(4), Han Y(4), Jiang J(2), Yan Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Communication and Information Engineering, Shanghai University, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Shanghai 
University, Shanghai, China.
(3)School of Electrical Engineering, Shandong University of Aeronautics, 
Binzhou, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Given the varying vulnerability of the rostral and caudal regions of 
the hippocampus to neuropathology in the Alzheimer's disease (AD) continuum, 
accurately assessing structural changes in these subregions is crucial for early 
AD detection. The development of reliable and robust automatic segmentation 
methods for hippocampal subregions (HS) is of utmost importance.
OBJECTIVE: Our aim is to propose and validate a HS segmentation model that is 
both training-free and highly generalizable. This method should exhibit 
comparable accuracy and efficiency to state-of-the-art techniques. The segmented 
HS can serve as a biomarker for studying the progression of AD.
METHODS: We utilized the functional magnetic resonance imaging of the Brain's 
Integrated Registration and Segmentation Tool (FIRST) to segment the entire 
hippocampus. By intersecting the segmentation results with the Brainnetome (BN) 
atlas, we obtained coarse segmentation of the four HS regions. This coarse 
segmentation was then employed as a shape prior term in the lattice Boltzmann 
(LB) model, as well as for initializing contours. Additionally, image gradients 
and local gray levels were integrated into the external force terms of the LB 
model to refine the coarse segmentation results. We assessed the segmentation 
accuracy of the model using the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) dataset and evaluated the potential of the segmentation results as AD 
biomarkers on both the ADNI and Xuanwu datasets.
RESULTS: The median Dice similarity coefficients (DSC) for the left caudal, 
right caudal, left rostral, and right rostral hippocampus were 0.87, 0.88, 0.88, 
and 0.89, respectively. The proportion of segmentation results with a DSC 
exceeding 0.8 was 77%, 78%, 77%, and 94% for the respective regions. In terms of 
volume, the correlation coefficients between the segmentation results of the 
four HS regions and the gold standard were 0.95, 0.93, 0.96, and 0.96, 
respectively. Regarding asymmetry, the correlation coefficient between the 
segmentation result's right caudal minus left caudal and the corresponding gold 
standard was 0.91, while for right rostral minus left rostral, it was 0.93. Over 
time, we observed a decline in the volumes of the four HS regions and the total 
hippocampal volume of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) converters. Analysis of 
inter-group differences revealed that, except for the right rostral region in 
the ADNI dataset, the p-values for the four HS regions in the normal controls 
(NC), MCI, and AD groups from both datasets were all below 0.05. The right 
caudal hippocampal volume demonstrated correlation coefficients of 0.47 and 0.43 
with the mini-mental state examination (MMSE) and Montreal cognitive assessment 
(MoCA), respectively. Similarly, the left rostral hippocampal volume showed 
correlation coefficients of 0.50 and 0.58 with MMSE and MoCA, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our framework allows for direct application to different brain 
magnetic resonance (MR) datasets without the need for training. It eliminates 
the requirement for complex image preprocessing steps while achieving 
segmentation accuracy comparable to deep learning (DL) methods even with small 
sample sizes. Compared to traditional active contour models (ACM) and 
atlas-based methods, our approach exhibits significant speed advantages. The 
segmented HS regions hold promise as potential biomarkers for studying the 
progression of AD.

© 2024 American Association of Physicists in Medicine.

DOI: 10.1002/mp.16984
PMID: 38373278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Alzheimers Dement. 2015 Sep;11(9):1080-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.09.002. Epub 
2014 Nov 15.

Self-rated and informant-rated everyday function in comparison to objective 
markers of Alzheimer's disease.

Rueda AD(1), Lau KM(2), Saito N(3), Harvey D(3), Risacher SL(4), Aisen PS(5), 
Petersen RC(6), Saykin AJ(4), Farias ST(7); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Veterans Affairs, Northern California Health Care System, Sacramento, CA, 
USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA.
(3)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of California, Davis, Davis, 
CA, USA.
(4)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology and the Mayo Alzheimer Disease Research Center, Mayo 
Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA. 
Electronic address: sarah.farias@ucdmc.ucdavis.edu.

It is recognized that individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) already 
demonstrate difficulty in aspects of daily functioning, which predicts disease 
progression. This study examined the relationship between self- versus 
informant-report of functional ability, and how those reports relate to 
objective disease measures across the disease spectrum (i.e. cognitively normal, 
MCI, Alzheimer's disease). A total of 1080 subjects with self- and/or 
informant-rated Everyday Cognition questionnaires were included. Objective 
measures included cognitive functioning, structural brain atrophy, cerebrospinal 
fluid abnormalities, and a marker of amyloid deposition using positron emission 
tomography with [18F]AV45 (florbetapir). Overall, informant-report was 
consistently more associated with objective markers of disease than self-report 
although self-reported functional status may still have some utility in early 
disease.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.09.002
PMCID: PMC4433437
PMID: 25449531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Brain Struct Funct. 2022 Apr;227(3):913-924. doi: 10.1007/s00429-021-02429-y. 
Epub 2022 Jan 14.

The impact of Alzheimer's disease susceptibility loci on lateral ventricular 
surface morphology in older adults.

Li S(1), An N(1), Chen N(1), Wang Y(1), Yang L(1), Wang Y(2), Yao Z(3), Hu 
B(4)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Gansu Provincial Key Laboratory of Wearable Computing, School of Information 
Science and Engineering, Lanzhou University, No. 222 South Tianshui Road, 
Lanzhou, 730000, Gansu Province, People's Republic of China.
(2)School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona 
State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(3)Gansu Provincial Key Laboratory of Wearable Computing, School of Information 
Science and Engineering, Lanzhou University, No. 222 South Tianshui Road, 
Lanzhou, 730000, Gansu Province, People's Republic of China. yaozj@lzu.edu.cn.
(4)Gansu Provincial Key Laboratory of Wearable Computing, School of Information 
Science and Engineering, Lanzhou University, No. 222 South Tianshui Road, 
Lanzhou, 730000, Gansu Province, People's Republic of China. bh@lzu.edu.cn.
(5)CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, 
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
ShangHai, China. bh@lzu.edu.cn.
(6)Joint Research Center for Cognitive Neurosensor Technology of Lanzhou 
University and Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
LanZhou, China. bh@lzu.edu.cn.
(7)Engineering Research Center of Open Source Software and Real-Time System, 
Ministry of Education, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China. bh@lzu.edu.cn.

The enlargement of ventricular volume is a general trend in the elderly, 
especially in patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD). Multiple susceptibility 
loci have been reported to have an increased risk for AD and the morphology of 
brain structures are affected by the variations in the risk loci. Therefore, we 
hypothesized that genes contributed significantly to the ventricular surface, 
and the changes of ventricular surface were associated with the impairment of 
cognitive functions. After the quality controls (QC) and genotyping, a lateral 
ventricular segmentation method was employed to obtain the surface features of 
lateral ventricle. We evaluated the influence of 18 selected AD susceptibility 
loci on both volume and surface morphology across 410 subjects from Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Correlations were conducted between 
radial distance (RD) and Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) subscales. Only 
the C allele at the rs744373 loci in BIN1 gene significantly accelerated the 
atrophy of lateral ventricle, including the anterior horn, body, and temporal 
horn of left lateral ventricle. No significant effect on lateral ventricle was 
found at other loci. Our results revealed that most regions of the bilateral 
ventricular surface were significantly negatively correlated with cognitive 
scores, particularly in delayed recall. Besides, small areas of surface were 
negatively correlated with language, orientation, and visuospatial scores. 
Together, our results indicated that the genetic variation affected the 
localized areas of lateral ventricular surface, and supported that lateral 
ventricle was an important brain structure associated with cognition in the 
elderly.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00429-021-02429-y
PMID: 35028746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 2024 May-Jun 01;39(3):239-246. doi: 
10.1097/HTR.0000000000000897. Epub 2023 Sep 8.

Research Letter: TBI Severity Moderates the Association Between Subjective and 
Objective Attention in Older Veterans.

Rantins P(1), Ly M, Clark AL, Weigand AJ, Alshaheri Durazo A, Merritt VC, Bangen 
KJ, Thomas KR; Department of Defense Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative*.

Author information:
(1)VA San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, California (Mr Rantins, Drs Ly, 
Merritt, Bangen, and Thomas and Ms Alshaheri Durazo); San Diego State 
University, San Diego, California (Mr Rantins and Ms Alshaheri Durazo); 
Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla (Drs Ly, 
Merritt, Bangen, and Thomas); Department of Psychology, University of Texas at 
Austin, Austin (Dr Clark); Joint Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology, San 
Diego State University/University of California, San Diego (Ms Weigand); Center 
of Excellence for Stress and Mental Health, VA San Diego Healthcare System, San 
Diego, California (Dr Merritt).

OBJECTIVE: This study examined the moderating effect of traumatic brain injury 
(TBI) history on subjective and objective cognition across multiple cognitive 
domains.
SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, AND DESIGN: Participants included 242 Vietnam-era 
veterans with a history of no TBI (n = 86), mild TBI (n = 74), or 
moderate-to-severe TBI (n = 82) from the observational Department of 
Defense-Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (DoD-ADNI) study.
MAIN MEASURES: Objective cognition was the outcome and was measured using 
neuropsychological measures in the domains of memory, attention/executive 
functioning, and language. Subjective cognition was measured using the memory, 
divided attention, and language subscales from the Everyday Cognition (ECog) 
measure. TBI severity status was the moderating variable.
RESULTS: Veterans with a history of moderate-to-severe TBI had a stronger 
negative association between subjective and objective attention relative to 
participants without a TBI ( P = .002). Although this association did not differ 
between mild TBI and no TBI history groups ( P = .100), the association between 
subjective and objective attention for the mild TBI group was intermediate to 
the no TBI and moderate-to-severe TBI history groups. TBI status did not 
moderate associations between subjective and objective memory or language.
CONCLUSION: Results highlight the importance of assessing subjective and 
objective cognition in older veterans and the relevance of attention in the 
context of TBI history. More work is needed to better understand the 
intersection of TBI and aging and how these factors may be used to guide 
individualized assessment and treatment approaches for older veterans.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/HTR.0000000000000897
PMCID: PMC10920393
PMID: 37712765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


42. Brain Commun. 2024 Jul 17;6(4):fcae240. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcae240. 
eCollection 2024.

Development of a machine learning algorithm to predict the residual cognitive 
reserve index.

Gavett BE(1), Tomaszewski Farias S(1), Fletcher E(1), Widaman K(2), Whitmer 
RA(1)(3), Mungas D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California Davis School of Medicine, 
Sacramento, CA 95816, USA.
(2)School of Education, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, CA 
92521, USA.
(3)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of California Davis, Davis, 
CA 95616, USA.

Elucidating the mechanisms by which late-life neurodegeneration causes cognitive 
decline requires understanding why some individuals are more resilient than 
others to the effects of brain change on cognition (cognitive reserve). 
Currently, there is no way of measuring cognitive reserve that is valid (e.g. 
capable of moderating brain-cognition associations), widely accessible (e.g. 
does not require neuroimaging and large sample sizes), and able to provide 
insight into resilience-promoting mechanisms. To address these limitations, this 
study sought to determine whether a machine learning approach to combining 
standard clinical variables could (i) predict a residual-based cognitive reserve 
criterion standard and (ii) prospectively moderate brain-cognition associations. 
In a training sample combining data from the University of California (UC) Davis 
and the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative-2 (ADNI-2) cohort (N = 
1665), we operationalized cognitive reserve using an MRI-based residual 
approach. An eXtreme Gradient Boosting machine learning algorithm was trained to 
predict this residual reserve index (RRI) using three models: Minimal (basic 
clinical data, such as age, education, anthropometrics, and blood pressure), 
Extended (Minimal model plus cognitive screening, word reading, and depression 
measures), and Full [Extended model plus Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) and 
Everyday Cognition (ECog) scale]. External validation was performed in an 
independent sample of ADNI 1/3/GO participants (N = 1640), which examined 
whether the effects of brain change on cognitive change were moderated by the 
machine learning models' cognitive reserve estimates. The three machine learning 
models differed in their accuracy and validity. The Minimal model did not 
correlate strongly with the criterion standard (r = 0.23) and did not moderate 
the effects of brain change on cognitive change. In contrast, the Extended and 
Full models were modestly correlated with the criterion standard (r = 0.49 and 
0.54, respectively) and prospectively moderated longitudinal brain-cognition 
associations, outperforming other cognitive reserve proxies (education, word 
reading). The primary difference between the Minimal model-which did not perform 
well as a measure of cognitive reserve-and the Extended and Full models-which 
demonstrated good accuracy and validity-is the lack of cognitive performance and 
informant-report data in the Minimal model. This suggests that basic clinical 
variables like anthropometrics, vital signs, and demographics are not sufficient 
for estimating cognitive reserve. Rather, the most accurate and valid estimates 
of cognitive reserve were obtained when cognitive performance data-ideally 
augmented by informant-reported functioning-was used. These results indicate 
that a dynamic and accessible proxy for cognitive reserve can be generated for 
individuals without neuroimaging data and gives some insight into factors that 
may promote resilience.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcae240
PMCID: PMC11291941
PMID: 39091422

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no competing interests.


43. J Alzheimers Dis. 2024;97(1):219-228. doi: 10.3233/JAD-230917.

Type 2 Diabetes Moderates the Association Between Amyloid and 1-Year Change in 
Everyday Functioning in Older Veterans.

Alshaheri Durazo A(1)(2), Weigand AJ(3), Bangen KJ(2)(4), Membreno R(1)(2), 
Mudaliar S(2)(4), Thomas KR(2)(4); Department of Defense Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)San Diego State University, San Diego, CA, USA.
(2)VA San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, CA, USA.
(3)San Diego State University/University of California, San Diego Joint Doctoral 
Program in Clinical Psychology, San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) affects ∼25% of Veterans, a 
prevalence rate double that of the general population. T2DM is associated with 
greater dementia risk and has been shown to exacerbate the impact of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) risk factors on declines in daily functioning; however, there are 
few studies that investigate these patterns in older Veterans.
OBJECTIVE: This study sought to determine whether T2DM moderates the association 
between amyloid-β (Aβ) positron emission tomography (PET) and 1-year change in 
everyday functioning in older Veterans.
METHODS: One-hundred-ninety-eight predominately male Vietnam-Era Veterans 
without dementia from the Department of Defense-Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (DoD-ADNI) with (n = 74) and without (n = 124) T2DM completed Aβ PET 
imaging and everyday functioning measures, including the Clinical Dementia 
Rating-Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) and Everyday Cognition (ECog). Linear mixed effects 
models tested the moderating role of T2DM on the association between Aβ PET and 
1-year change in everyday functioning.
RESULTS: The 3-way T2DM×Aβ PET×time interaction was significant for CDR-SB 
(p < 0.001) as well as the Memory (p = 0.007) and Language (p = 0.011) subscales 
from the ECog. Greater amyloid burden was associated with greater increases in 
functional difficulties, but only in Veterans with T2DM.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher Aβ was only associated with declines in everyday functioning 
over 1 year in Veterans with T2DM. Given that people with T2DM are more likely 
to have co-occurring cerebrovascular disease, the combination of multiple 
neuropathologies may result in faster declines. Future studies should examine 
how diabetes duration, severity, and medications impact these associations.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-230917
PMID: 38160359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Oct;20(10):7232-7247. doi: 10.1002/alz.14234. Epub 2024 
Sep 1.

The ADNI4 Digital Study: A novel approach to recruitment, screening, and 
assessment of participants for AD clinical research.

Miller MJ(1)(2)(3), Diaz A(1)(2)(3), Conti C(1)(2)(3), Albala B(4)(5)(6)(7), 
Flenniken D(1)(2)(3), Fockler J(2)(3), Kwang W(2)(3), Sacrey DT(1)(2)(3), 
Ashford MT(1)(2)(3), Skirrow C(8), Weston J(8), Fristed E(8), Farias ST(9), 
Korecka M(10), Wan Y(10), Aisen PS(11), Beckett L(12), Harvey D(12), Lee EB(10), 
Petersen RC(13), Shaw LM(10), Okonkwo OC(14), Mindt MR(15)(16), Weiner 
MW(1)(2)(3), Nosheny RL(1)(2)(3)(17); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Northern California Institute for Research and Education (NCIRE), San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(2)VA Advanced Imaging Research Center, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, San Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(4)Department Environmental & Occupational Health, Public Health, University of 
California Irvine, Irvine, California, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of California Irvine School of Medicine, 
Irvine, California, USA.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California Irvine School 
of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Sciences, Irvine, California, USA.
(7)Research Service, Veterans Administration Long Beach Healthcare System, Long 
Beach, California, USA.
(8)Novoic Ltd., London, UK.
(9)Department of Neurology, University of California, Davis, Davis, California, 
USA.
(10)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania 
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(11)Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute, University of Southern 
California, San Diego, California, USA.
(12)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of California, Davis, 
California, USA.
(13)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(14)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, School of Medicine and Public 
Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(15)Departments of Psychology, Latin American Latinx Studies Institute, and 
African and African American Studies, Fordham University, New York, New York, 
USA.
(16)Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
New York, USA.
(17)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of California 
San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.

INTRODUCTION: We evaluated preliminary feasibility of a digital, 
culturally-informed approach to recruit and screen participants for the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI4).
METHODS: Participants were recruited using digital advertising and completed 
digital surveys (e.g., demographics, medical exclusion criteria, 12-item 
Everyday Cognition Scale [ECog-12]), Novoic Storyteller speech-based cognitive 
test). Completion rates and assessment performance were compared between 
underrepresented populations (URPs: individuals from ethnoculturally minoritized 
or low education backgrounds) and non-URPs.
RESULTS: Of 3099 participants who provided contact information, 654 enrolled in 
the cohort, and 595 completed at least one assessment. Two hundred forty-seven 
participants were from URPs. Of those enrolled, 465 met ADNI4 inclusion criteria 
and 237 evidenced possible cognitive impairment from ECog-12 or Storyteller 
performance. URPs had lower ECog and Storyteller completion rates. Scores varied 
by ethnocultural group and educational level.
DISCUSSION: Preliminary results demonstrate digital recruitment and screening 
assessment of an older diverse cohort, including those with possible cognitive 
impairment, are feasible. Improving engagement and achieving educational 
diversity are key challenges.
HIGHLIGHTS: A total of 654 participants enrolled in a digital cohort to 
facilitate ADNI4 recruitment. Culturally-informed digital ads aided enrollment 
of underrepresented populations. From those enrolled, 42% were from 
underrepresented ethnocultural and educational groups. Digital screening tools 
indicate > 50% of participants likely cognitively impaired. Completion rates and 
assessment performance vary by ethnocultural group and education.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14234
PMCID: PMC11485063
PMID: 39219153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Miller, Mr. Diaz, and Ms. Conti report no 
disclosures other than supported by the ADNI4 grant. Dr. Albala, Mr. Flenniken, 
Ms. Fockler, Ms. Kwang, Ms. Truran Sacery, Dr. Korecka, and Mr. Wan report no 
disclosures other than supported in part by the ADNI4 grant. Dr. Ashford reports 
a grant to institution from NIH. Dr. Skirrow is an employee of Novoic Ltd. and 
is a Novoic option‐holder or shareholder. Dr. Weston is the co‐director of 
Novoic Ltd. and is a Novoic option‐holder or shareholder. Mr. Fristed is the 
co‐director of Novoic Ltd. and is a Novoic option‐holder or shareholder. Dr. 
Tomaszewski Farias reports no disclosures. Dr. Aisen has research grants from 
Lilly and Eisai, and consults with Merck, Roche, Genentech, Abbvie, Biogen, 
ImmunoBrain Checkpoint and Arrowhead. Dr. Beckett receives support from NIH 
(ADNI grant), no conflicts to disclose. Dr. Harvey receives support in the form 
of grants to University of California, Davis from NIH and serves as a 
Statistical Advisor for PLOS ONE. Dr. Lee receives support from the NIH and the 
Delaware Community Foundation. Dr. Petersen has consulted for Roche, Inc., 
Merck, Inc., Biogen, Inc., Eisai, Inc., Nestle, Inc., and Genentech, Inc. Dr. 
Shaw receives support from Roche (IIS and in‐kind reagents and instrumentation 
support for CSF AD biomarkers). He has also received honoraria from Roche, 
Biogen, and Fujirebio for participation in teaching programs and served on 
Advisory Boards for Roche and Biogen. Dr. Okonkwo is supported by NIH grants to 
the University of Wisconsin‐Madison. Dr. Rivera Mindt receives support in the 
form of grants to Fordham University or the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai from NIH/NIA, The Alzheimer's Association, and Genentech Inc. Charitable 
Foundation. Dr. Weiner serves on editorial boards for Alzheimer's Dement, 
MRI and TMRI. He has served on advisory boards for Acumen Pharmaceutical, ADNI, 
Alzheon, Inc., Biogen, Brain Health Registry, Cerecin, Dolby Family Ventures, 
Eli Lilly, Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., National Institute on Aging (NIA), 
Nestle/Nestec, PCORI/PPRN, Roche, University of Southern California (USC), 
NervGen. He has provided consulting to Baird Equity Capital, BioClinica, 
Cerecin, Inc., Cytox, Dolby Family Ventures, Duke University, Eisai, 
FUJIFILM‐Toyama Chemical (Japan), Garfield Weston, Genentech, Guidepoint Global, 
Indiana University, Japanese Organization for Medical Device Development, Inc. 
(JOMDD), Medscape, Nestle/Nestec, NIH, Peerview Internal Medicine, Roche, T3D 
Therapeutics, University of Southern California (USC), and Vida Ventures. He has 
acted as a speaker/lecturer to The Buck Institute for Research on Aging, China 
Association for Alzheimer's Disease (CAAD), Japan Society for Dementia Research, 
and Korean Dementia Society. He holds stock options with Alzheon, Inc., Alzeca, 
and Anven. The following entities have provided funding for academic travel: 
University of Southern California (USC), NervGen, ASFNR, and CTAD Congress. Dr. 
Rachel L. Nosheny reports grants to institution from NIH, California Department 
of Public Health, and Genentech, Inc. Author disclosures are available in the 
supporting information.


45. Front Aging Neurosci. 2024 Mar 6;16:1335878. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1335878. 
eCollection 2024.

Anosognosia is associated with increased prevalence and faster development of 
neuropsychiatric symptoms in mild cognitive impairment.

Wang S(1), Mimmack K(1), Cacciamani F(1)(2)(3)(4), Elnemais Fawzy M(5)(6), Munro 
C(1)(5)(6), Gatchel J(6)(7)(8), Marshall GA(1)(5)(6), Gagliardi G(1)(5)(6), 
Vannini P(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(2)Bordeaux Population Health Center, University of Bordeaux, Inserm, Bordeaux, 
France.
(3)Sorbonne Université, Institut du Cerveau - Paris Brain Institute - ICM, CNRS, 
Inria, Inserm, AP-HP, Hôpital de la Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(4)Qarinel SAS, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(6)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(8)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA, United 
States.

INTRODUCTION: Both the loss of awareness for cognitive decline (a. k.a 
anosognosia) and neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS) are common in patients with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia, even in prodromal stages, and may exacerbate 
functional impairment and negatively impact caregiver burden. Despite the high 
impact of these symptoms on patients and their caregivers, our knowledge of how 
they develop across the AD spectrum is limited. Here, we explored the 
cross-sectional and longitudinal associations between anosognosia and NPS in 
individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: We included 237 participants from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) with a baseline clinical diagnosis of MCI. Everyday Cognition 
(ECog) questionnaire scores were used to measure complaints from participants 
and study-partners at baseline and annually over a mean of 4.29 years [standard 
deviation (SD) = 2.72]. Anosognosia was defined as the study-partner having an 
ECog score ≥2.5/4 and the participant having an ECog score < 2.5/4 on their 
baseline measure and their last observation without more than two consecutive 
deviating observations during the follow-up period. The 12-item 
study-partner-rated Neuropsychiatric Inventory determined the presence or 
absence of specific NPS. Survival analyses were performed to analyze the 
frequency and temporal onset of NPS over time in individuals with and without 
anosognosia.
RESULTS: Thirty-eight out of 237 participants displayed anosognosia. Groups had 
similar lengths of follow-up at baseline (p > 0.9), though participants with 
anosognosia had lower MMSE scores (p = 0.049) and a higher proportion of 
amyloid-positivity using PET (p < 0.001. At baseline, the frequencies of 
agitation (p = 0.029) and disinhibition (p < 0.001) were higher in the 
anosognosia group compared to the non-anosognosia group. Survival analyses 
showed earlier onset of seven of the 12 NPS in the anosognosia group (p's < 
0.001).
DISCUSSION: Loss of awareness for cognitive decline is associated with greater 
frequency and earlier onset of NPS over time in participants with MCI. These 
results support the hypothesis of a potential common underlying 
neurophysiological process for anosognosia and NPS, a finding that needs to be 
addressed in future studies.

Copyright © 2024 Wang, Mimmack, Cacciamani, Elnemais Fawzy, Munro, Gatchel, 
Marshall, Gagliardi and Vannini.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1335878
PMCID: PMC10950916
PMID: 38511196

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


46. Front Aging Neurosci. 2024 Sep 13;16:1397696. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1397696. 
eCollection 2024.

EBF1 is a potential biomarker for predicting progression from mild cognitive 
impairment to Alzheimer's disease: an in silico study.

Ju Y(1)(2), Li S(1)(2), Kong X(3), Zhao Q(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, China.
(2)Engineering Laboratory of Memory and Cognitive Impairment Disease of Jilin 
Province, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Lymphatic Surgery of Jilin Province, China-Japan Union 
Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, China.

INTRODUCTION: The prediction of progression from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
to Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an important clinical challenge. This study aimed 
to identify the independent risk factors and develop a nomogram model that can 
predict progression from MCI to AD.
METHODS: Data of 141 patients with MCI were obtained from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. We set a follow-up time of 72 
months and defined patients as stable MCI (sMCI) or progressive MCI (pMCI) 
according to whether or not the progression of MCI to AD occurred. We identified 
and screened independent risk factors by utilizing weighted gene co-expression 
network analysis (WGCNA), where we obtained 14,893 genes after data 
preprocessing and selected the soft threshold β = 7 at an R 2 of 0.85 to achieve 
a scale-free network. A total of 14 modules were discovered, with the 
midnightblue module having a strong association with the prognosis of MCI. Using 
machine learning strategies, which included the least absolute selection and 
shrinkage operator and support vector machine-recursive feature elimination; and 
the Cox proportional-hazards model, which included univariate and multivariable 
analyses, we identified and screened independent risk factors. Subsequently, we 
developed a nomogram model for predicting the progression from MCI to AD. The 
performance of our nomogram was evaluated by the C-index, calibration curve, and 
decision curve analysis (DCA). Bioinformatics analysis and immune infiltration 
analysis were conducted to clarify the function of early B cell factor 1 (EBF1).
RESULTS: First, the results showed that 40 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) 
related to the prognosis of MCI were generated by weighted gene co-expression 
network analysis. Second, five hub variables were obtained through the 
abovementioned machine learning strategies. Third, a low Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA) score [hazard ratio (HR): 4.258, 95% confidence interval (CI): 
1.994-9.091] and low EBF1 expression (hazard ratio: 3.454, 95% confidence 
interval: 1.813-6.579) were identified as the independent risk factors through 
the Cox proportional-hazards regression analysis. Finally, we developed a 
nomogram model including the MoCA score, EBF1, and potential confounders (age 
and gender). By evaluating our nomogram model and validating it in both internal 
and external validation sets, we demonstrated that our nomogram model exhibits 
excellent predictive performance. Through the Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment 
analysis, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes Genomes (KEGG) functional enrichment 
analysis, and immune infiltration analysis, we found that the role of EBF1 in 
MCI was closely related to B cells.
CONCLUSION: EBF1, as a B cell-specific transcription factor, may be a key target 
for predicting progression from MCI to AD. Our nomogram model was able to 
provide personalized risk factors for the progression from MCI to AD after 
evaluation and validation.

Copyright © 2024 Ju, Li, Kong and Zhao.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1397696
PMCID: PMC11427346
PMID: 39347016

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


47. Turk J Med Sci. 2024 Jan 5;54(4):688-699. doi: 10.55730/1300-0144.5838. 
eCollection 2024.

Can volumetric magnetic resonance imaging evaluations be helpful in the 
follow-up of cognitive functions in cognitively normal Parkinson's disease 
patients?

Uysal HA(1), Hünerli D(2), Çakmur R(3), Dönmez Çolakoğlu B(3), Ada E(4), Yener 
G(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, İzmir University of Economics, Medical Point 
Hospital, İzmir, Turkiye.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Institute of Health Sciences, Dokuz Eylül 
University, İzmir, Turkiye.
(3)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Dokuz Eylül University, İzmir, 
Turkiye.
(4)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, Dokuz Eylül University, İzmir, 
Turkiye.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, İzmir University of Economics, İzmir, Turkiye.
(6)İzmir Biomedicine and Genome Center, İzmir, Turkiye.

BACKGROUND/AIM: In this study, besides the evaluation of gray and white matter 
changes in cognitively normal Parkinson's disease (PD-CN) patients with 
volumetric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) parameters, it was tried to show 
that some neuropsychological tests may be impaired in PD-CN patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twenty-six PD-CN patients and 26 healthy elderly (HC) 
participants were included in the current study. Global cognitive status was 
assessed using the mini-mental state examination (MMSE), and the Montreal 
cognitive assessment scale (MoCA). Attention and executive functions were 
evaluated using the Wechsler memory scale-revised (WMS-R) digit span test and 
trail making test (TMT) part A and part B, the Stroop test, semantic and 
phonemic fluency tests, and clock drawing test. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
was acquired according to the Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative (ADNI) 
protocol.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences among groups regarding age, sex, 
handedness, and years of education. In the comparison of the PD-CN group and the 
HC group, there was a statistical decrease in the total animal scores, lexical 
fluency, TMT part A and TMT part B scores in the PD-CN group. Subcortical gray 
matter volumes (GMV) were significantly lower in PD-CN patients. The PD-CN group 
had a significantly reduced total volume of right putamen and left angular gyrus 
compared to that in the HC group. We observed that putamen and angular gyrus 
volumes were lower in PD-CN patients. On the other hand, TMT part B may be a 
useful pretest in detecting the conversion of mild cognitive impairment in PD.
CONCLUSION: Significant MRI volumetric measurements and neuropsychological test 
batteries can be helpful in the clinical follow-up in PD-CN patients.

© TÜBİTAK.

DOI: 10.55730/1300-0144.5838
PMCID: PMC11407370
PMID: 39295615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.