1. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Dec 22. doi: 10.1002/alz.14321. Online ahead of print.

Overview of Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative and future clinical 
trials.

Weiner MW(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Kanoria S(1)(6), Miller MJ(1)(6), Aisen PS(7), 
Beckett LA(8), Conti C(1)(6), Diaz A(1)(6), Flenniken D(6), Green RC(9), Harvey 
DJ(8), Jack CR Jr(10), Jagust W(11), Lee EB(12), Morris JC(13)(14)(15), Nho 
K(16)(17), Nosheny R(1)(4), Okonkwo OC(18), Perrin RJ(13)(14)(15), Petersen 
RC(19), Rivera-Mindt M(20)(21), Saykin AJ(16)(22), Shaw LM(23), Toga AW(24), 
Tosun D(1)(2), Veitch DP(1)(6); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of California 
San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(6)Northern California Institute for Research and Education (NCIRE), San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(7)Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute, University of Southern 
California, San Diego, California, USA.
(8)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Sciences, University 
of California, Medical Sciences 1C, Davis, California, USA.
(9)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Broad Institute Ariadne Labs and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(10)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(11)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California, USA.
(12)Translational Neuropathology Research Laboratory, Department of Pathology 
and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(13)Knight Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA.
(14)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(15)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(16)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences and the Indiana Alzheimer's 
Disease Research Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
Indiana, USA.
(17)Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(18)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Disease Research Center and Department of Medicine, 
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Clinical Science 
Center, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(19)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(20)Department of Psychology, Latin American and Latino Studies Institute, 
African and African American Studies, Fordham University, Bronx, New York, USA.
(21)Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
New York, USA.
(22)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(23)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and the PENN Alzheimer's 
Disease Research Center, Center for Neurodegenerative Research, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.
(24)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Institute of Neuroimaging and Informatics, Keck 
School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, San Diego, 
California, USA.

The overall goal of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) is to 
optimize and validate biomarkers for clinical trials while sharing all data and 
biofluid samples with the global scientific community. ADNI has been 
instrumental in standardizing and validating amyloid beta (Aβ) and tau positron 
emission tomography (PET) imaging. ADNI data were used for the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) approval of the Fujirebio and Roche Elecsys cerebrospinal 
fluid diagnostic tests. Additionally, ADNI provided data for the trials of the 
FDA-approved treatments aducanumab, lecanemab, and donanemab. More than 6000 
scientific papers have been published using ADNI data, reflecting ADNI's 
promotion of open science and data sharing. Despite its enormous success, ADNI 
has some limitations, particularly in generalizing its data and findings to the 
entire US/Canadian population. This introduction provides a historical overview 
of ADNI and highlights its significant accomplishments and future vision to 
pioneer "the clinical trial of the future" focusing on demographic inclusivity. 
HIGHLIGHTS: The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) introduced a 
novel model for public-private partnerships and data sharing. It successfully 
validated amyloid and Tau PET imaging, as well as CSF and plasma biomarkers, for 
diagnosing Alzheimer's disease. ADNI generated and disseminated vital data for 
designing AD clinical trials.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14321
PMID: 39711072


2. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Nov 30. doi: 10.1002/alz.14264. Online ahead of print.

ADNI Biomarker Core: A review of progress since 2004 and future challenges.

Shaw LM(1), Korecka M(1), Lee EB(1), Cousins KAQ(2), Vanderstichele H(3), 
Schindler SE(4), Tosun D(5), DeMarco ML(6), Brylska M(1), Wan Y(1), Burnham 
S(7), Sciulli A(1), Vulaj A(1), Tropea TF(2), Chen-Plotkin A(2), Wolk DA(2); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania 
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Neurology Department, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Biomarkable bv, Tuinwijklaan, Belgium, Belgium.
(4)Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(5)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Van Couver, Canada.
(7)Department of AVID, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

BACKGROUND: We describe the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
Biomarker Core major activities from October 2004 to March 2024, including 
biobanking ADNI cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), plasma, and serum biofluid samples, 
biofluid analyses for Alzheimer's disease (AD) biomarkers in the Biomarker Core 
and various non-ADNI laboratories, and continuous assessments of pre-analytics.
RESULTS: Validated immunoassay and mass spectrometry-based assays were performed 
in CSF with a shift to plasma, a more accessible biofluid, as qualified assays 
became available. Performance comparisons across different CSF and plasma AD 
biomarker measurement platforms have enriched substantially the ADNI participant 
database enabling method performance determinations for AD pathology detection 
and longitudinal assessments of disease progression.
DISCUSSION: Close collaboration with academic and industrial partners in the 
validation and implementation of AD biomarkers for early detection of disease 
pathology in treatment trials and ultimately in clinical practice is a key 
factor for the success of the work done in the Biomarker Core.
HIGHLIGHTS: Describe ADNI Biomarker Core biobanking and sample distribution from 
2007 to 2024. Discuss validated mass spectrometry and immunoassay methods for 
ADNI biofluid analyses. Review collaborations with academic and industrial 
partners to detect AD and progression. Discuss major challenges, and progress to 
date, for co-pathology detection. Implementation in the ATN scheme: co-pathology 
and modeling disease progression.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14264
PMID: 39614747


3. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Nov 26. doi: 10.1002/alz.14383. Online ahead of print.

The Consortium for Clarity in ADRD Research Through Imaging (CLARiTI).

Mormino EC(1)(2), Biber SA(3), Rahman-Filipiak A(4), Arfanakis K(5), Clark L(6), 
Dage JL(7)(8), Detre JA(9), Dickerson BC(10), Donohue MC(11)(12), Kecskemeti 
S(6), Hohman TJ(13), Jagust WJ(14)(15), Keene DC(16), Kukull W(3)(17), 
Levendovszky SR(18), Rosen H(19), Thompson PM(20), Villemagne VL(21), Wolk 
DA(9), Okonkwo OC(6), Rabinvovici GD(19), Rivera-Mindt M(22)(23), Foroud T(24), 
Johnson SC(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Palo Alto, California, USA.
(2)Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Cogen Facility, Stanford, California, USA.
(3)National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(5)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Illinois Tech, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public 
Health, Health Sciences Learning Center, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
Indiana, USA.
(8)Stark Neurosciences Research Institute, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(10)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(11)Department of Neurology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(12)Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute (ATRI), University of Southern 
California, San Diego, California, USA.
(13)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA.
(14)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of 
California, Berkeley, California, USA.
(15)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 
California, USA.
(16)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.
(17)Department of Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
USA.
(18)Department of Radiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(19)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, 
California, USA.
(20)Department of Ophthalmology, Psychiatry and the Behavioral Sciences, 
Radiology, Psychiatry, and Engineering, Keck School of Medicine, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(21)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(22)Department of Psychology, Fordham University, Bronx, New York, USA.
(23)Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
New York, USA.
(24)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

The presence of multiple pathologies is the largest predictor of dementia. A 
major gap in the field is the in vivo detection of mixed pathologies and their 
antecedents. The Alzheimer's Disease Research Centers (ADRCs) are uniquely 
positioned to address this gap. The ADRCs longitudinally follow ≈ 17,000 
participants, ranging from cognitively unimpaired to dementia, arising from 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related dementias (ADRD; e.g., AD, Lewy body 
disorders, vascular). Motivated by the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative's (ADNI) impact, the ADRC Consortium for Clarity in ADRD Research 
Through Imaging (CLARiTI) was formed. Leveraging existing ADRC infrastructure, 
CLARiTI will integrate standardized imaging and plasma collection to 
characterize mixed pathologies and use community-engaged research methods to 
ensure that ≥ 25% of the sample is from underrepresented populations (e.g., 
ethnoculturally minoritized, low education). The resulting ADRD profiles, within 
a more diverse sample, will provide key resources for ADRCs and an 
unprecedented, more generalizable publicly available imaging-plasma dataset. 
HIGHLIGHTS: In vivo detection of mixed pathologies is critical for Alzheimer's 
disease and related dementias research. The Alzheimer's Disease Research Centers 
(ADRCs) are uniquely positioned to address gaps related to mixed pathologies. 
The ADRC Consortium for Clarity in ADRD Research Through Imaging (CLARiTI) will 
enhance this national program by adding standardized imaging and plasma 
collection to existing ADRC infrastructure. This effort will provide key 
resources for ADRCs and an unprecedented publicly available 
imaging-plasma-neuropath dataset.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14383
PMID: 39588767


4. Neuropsychol Rev. 2024 Nov 20. doi: 10.1007/s11065-024-09655-1. Online ahead of 
print.

Measurement Error and Methodologic Issues in Analyses of the Proportion of 
Variance Explained in Cognition.

Nichols E(1)(2), Aslanyan V(3), Adrien TV(4), Andrews RM(5), Fardo DW(6), Gavett 
BE(7), Paterson TSE(8), Turney IC(9), Young CB(10), Uanhoro JO(11), Gross 
AL(12), Initiative FTADN.

Author information:
(1)Center for Economic and Social Research, University of Southern California, 
VPD, 635 Downey Way, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, USA. emmanich@usc.edu.
(2)Lenoard Davis School of Gerontology, University of Southern California, 3715 
McClintock Avenue, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, USA. emmanich@usc.edu.
(3)Department of Population and Public Health Sciences, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, 1845 N. Soto St, Los Angeles, CA, 90032, USA.
(4)Department of Clinical and Health Psychology, University of Florida, 1225 
Center Dr, Gainesville, FL, 32603, USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Boston University, 715 
Albany St, Boston, MA, 02118, USA.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, Sanders-Brown Center On Aging, Lexington, KY, 
40536, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, University of California Davis School of Medicine, 
Sacramento, CA, 95816, USA.
(8)Department of Psychology, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, V8W 2Y2, 
Canada.
(9)Taub Institute for Research On Alzheimers Disease and the Aging Brain, 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, 10032, 
USA.
(10)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, 213 Quarry Road, Palo Alto, CA, 94304, USA.
(11)Department of Educational Psychology, University of North Texas, 1300 W. 
Highland Street Denton, Denton, TX, 76203, USA.
(12)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD, 21231, USA.

Existing studies examining the predictive ability of biomarkers for cognitive 
outcomes do not account for variance due to measurement error, which could lead 
to under-estimates of the proportion of variance explained. We used data from 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) (N = 1084) to estimate 
the proportion of variance explained by Alzheimer's disease (AD) imaging 
biomarkers in four cognitive outcomes: memory, executive functioning, language, 
and visuospatial functioning. We compared estimates from standard models that do 
not account for measurement error, and multilevel models that do account for 
measurement error. We also examined estimates across diagnostic subgroups 
(normal, MCI, AD). Estimates of the proportion of variance explained from 
multilevel models accounting for measurement error were larger (e.g., for 
language, 9-47% vs. 7-34% under standard modeling), with relatively greater 
differences between standard and multilevel measurement models for cognitive 
outcomes that have larger measurement error variance. Heterogeneity across 
subgroups also emphasized the importance of sample composition. Future studies 
should evaluate measurement error adjustments when considerable measurement 
error in cognitive outcomes is suspected.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11065-024-09655-1
PMID: 39567460

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing Interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.


5. Adv Neurobiol. 2024;40:67-85. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-69491-2_3.

Public-Private Partnerships for Neuropsychiatric Drug Development: A 
Perspective.

Potter WZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Independent Expert, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

There is a long-standing interest in developing biomarkers for neuropsychiatric 
disorders that might assist in drug development or clinical management. To date, 
however, progress has been limited in part because of the limited nature of the 
studies and the absence of the types of large-scale networks that would be 
required for clinical validation. The first public-private partnership (PPP) for 
biomarker validation-the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)-was 
formed in 2004 to focus on the development of amyloid deposition in the brain as 
a potential biomarker of Alzheimer's disease pathology. Over the past 20 years, 
ADNI has achieved many of its initial deliverables, while others remain a work 
in progress. ADNI also serves as a point of reference for other more recently 
established PPPs. Key components for PPP development include processes for 
identifying stakeholders and deliverables, governance and management, funding, 
and data access/sharing. These issues are discussed in relationship to more 
recently developed PPPs. Given the extensive investment needed for biomarker 
development within the pre-competitive space, PPPs provide a critical path for 
the development of next-generation tools for central nervous system (CNS) drug 
development.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-69491-2_3
PMID: 39562441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Dec;20(12):8953-8968. doi: 10.1002/alz.14358. Epub 2024 
Nov 13.

Cerebrovascular markers of WMH and infarcts in ADNI: A historical perspective 
and future directions.

Maillard P(1), Fletcher E(1), Carmichael O(2), Schwarz C(3), Seiler S(1)(4), 
DeCarli C(1); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California at Davis, Sacramento, 
California, USA.
(2)Biomedical Imaging, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Louisiana State 
University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA.
(3)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.

White matter hyperintensities (WMH) and infarcts found on magnetic resonance 
imaging (MR infarcts) are common biomarkers of cerebrovascular disease. In this 
review, we summarize the methods, publications, and conclusions stemming from 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) related to these 
measures. We combine analysis of WMH and MR infarct data from across the three 
main ADNI cohorts with a review of existing literature discussing new 
methodologies and scientific findings derived from these data. Although ADNI 
inclusion criteria were designed to minimize vascular risk factors and disease, 
data across all the ADNI cohorts found consistent trends of increasing WMH 
volumes associated with advancing age, female sex, and cognitive impairment. 
ADNI, initially proposed as a study to investigate biomarkers of AD pathology, 
has also helped elucidate the impact of asymptomatic cerebrovascular brain 
injury on cognition within a cohort relatively free of vascular disease. Future 
ADNI work will emphasize additional vascular biomarkers. HIGHLIGHTS: White 
matter hyperintensities (WMHs) are common to advancing age and likely reflect 
brain vascular injury among older individuals. WMH and to a lesser extent, 
magnetic resonance (MR) infarcts, affect risk for transition to cognitive 
impairment. WMHs and MR infarcts are present, even among Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) participants highly selected to have Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) as the primary pathology. WMH burden in ADNI is greater among 
individuals with cognitive impairment and has been associated with AD 
neurodegenerative markers and cerebral amyloidosis. The negative additive 
effects of cerebrovascular disease appear present, even in select populations, 
and future biomarker work needs to further explore this relationship.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14358
PMCID: PMC11667517
PMID: 39535353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
Author disclosures are available in the supporting information.


7. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Dec;20(12):8937-8952. doi: 10.1002/alz.14310. Epub 2024 
Oct 21.

Arterial spin labeling perfusion MRI in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative: Past, present, and future.

Thropp P(1), Phillips E(1), Jung Y(2), Thomas DL(3), Tosun D(4); Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Northern California Institute 
for Research and Education (NCIRE), San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of California Davis, Sacramento, 
California, USA.
(3)Department of Brain Repair and Rehabilitation, UCL Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology, London, UK.
(4)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.

On the 20th anniversary of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI), this paper provides a comprehensive overview of the role of arterial 
spin labeling (ASL) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in understanding perfusion 
changes in the aging brain and the relationship with Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
pathophysiology and its comorbid conditions. We summarize previously used 
acquisition protocols, available data, and the motivation for adopting a 
multi-post-labeling delay (PLD) acquisition scheme in the latest ADNI MRI 
protocol (ADNI 4). We also detail the process of setting up this scheme on 
different scanners, emphasizing the potential of ASL imaging in future AD 
research. HIGHLIGHTS: The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
adopted multimodal arterial spin labeling magnetic resonance imaging (ASL MRI) 
to meet evolving biomarker requirements. The ADNI provides one of the largest 
multisite, multi-vendor ASL data collections. The ADNI 4 incorporates 
multi-post-labeling delay ASL techniques to jointly quantify cerebral blood flow 
and arterial transit time. ADNI 4 ASL MRI protocol is apt for detecting early 
Alzheimer's disease with cerebrovascular pathology.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14310
PMCID: PMC11667499
PMID: 39428971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P.T., E.P., Y.J., D.L.T., and D.T. have no 
conflicts of interest. D.L.T. is supported by the UCLH NIHR Biomedical Research 
Centre. Author disclosures are available in the supporting information.


8. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Nov;20(11):8153-8161. doi: 10.1002/alz.14285. Epub 2024 
Oct 6.

Argentina-Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative: pioneering Alzheimer's 
Research in Latin America and its Implications for Regional Advancement.

Cubas Guillen JF(1), Chrem Méndez P(1), Surace E(2)(3), Martin ME(1), Clarens 
F(1), Russo J(1)(3), Harris P(1)(3), Egido N(1), Tapajoz F(1), Chaves H(4), 
Vázquez S(5), Martinetto H(2), Campos J(1), Calandri IL(1), Sevlever G(2)(6), 
Allegri RF(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Neurology, Neuropsychology and Neuropsychiatry, 
Instituto Neurológico Fleni, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Instituto Neurológico Fleni, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(3)Fleni-CONICET (Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y 
Tecnológicas), Ciudad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Department of Neuroimaging, Instituto Neurológico Fleni, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(5)Centre of Molecular Imaging, Instituto Neurológico Fleni, Escobar, Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(6)Department of Neuropathology, Instituto Neurológico Fleni, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) has fostered 
collaboration among researchers around the world, catalyzing innovation and 
accelerating progress in the field. In Latin America, this initiative advanced 
the validation and development of Alzheimer's disease biomarkers for the first 
time in our region. In 2011, as part of the international ADNI, Argentina-ADNI 
(Arg-ADNI) was founded. The following years were characterized by strong support 
from entities such as the Alzheimer's Association, transforming into the 
emergence of several multinational studies focusing on prevention and diagnosis, 
and treatment of dementias. These studies are heirs to the tradition of 
Arg-ADNI: the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network, Latin American Initiative 
for Lifestyle Intervention to Prevent Cognitive Decline, Longitudinal 
Early-Onset Alzheimer's Disease Study, and Initiative for the Study of Down 
Syndrome and Alzheimer's Disease. These initiatives have contributed 
significantly to the development of regional research and serve as essential 
tools for health policy planning in Latin America. HIGHLIGHTS: In Latin America, 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) advanced the validation 
and development of Alzheimer's disease biomarkers for the first time in our 
region. ADNI has been the basis that boosted several multinational studies 
focusing on both prevention and diagnosis, and treatment of dementias 
(Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network, LatAm-FINGER, LEADS). These initiatives 
with the support from the Alzheimer's Association have contributed significantly 
to the development of regional research This is an example of collaboration 
between high-income countries with low- and middle-income countries aimed at 
global scientific development and inclusion.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14285
PMCID: PMC11567812
PMID: 39369277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P.C.M. reports grants paid to his institution 
from the Alzheimer's Association and Washington University in St. Louis. I.C. 
reports grants paid to his institution from the Alzheimer's Association. G.S. 
reports grants paid to his institution from the Alzheimer's Association. R.F.A. 
reports honoraria as a speaker from Tecnofarma, Biogen, Bago, Roche, and Novo 
Nordisk, and grants paid to his institution from the Alzheimer's Association and 
Washington University in St. Louis. The other authors declare no conflicts of 
interest. Author disclosures are available in the supporting information.


9. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Nov;20(11):8113-8128. doi: 10.1002/alz.14161. Epub 2024 
Sep 16.

Morphometry of medial temporal lobe subregions using high-resolution T2-weighted 
MRI in ADNI3: Why, how, and what's next?

Yushkevich PA(1), Ittyerah R(1), Li Y(1), Denning AE(1), Sadeghpour N(1), Lim 
S(1), McGrew E(2), Xie L(3), DeFlores R(4), Brown CA(2), Wisse LEM(5), Wolk 
DA(2), Das SR(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Digital Technology and Innovation, Siemens Healthineers, 
Malvern, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)UMR-S U1237, PhIND "Physiopathology and Imaging of Neurological Disorders", 
INSERM, Caen, France.
(5)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

This paper for the 20th anniversary of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) provides an overview of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of 
medial temporal lobe (MTL) subregions in ADNI using a dedicated high-resolution 
T2-weighted sequence. A review of the work that supported the inclusion of this 
imaging modality into ADNI Phase 3 is followed by a brief description of the 
ADNI MTL imaging and analysis protocols and a summary of studies that have used 
these data. This review is supplemented by a new study that uses novel 
surface-based tools to characterize MTL neurodegeneration across 
biomarker-defined AD stages. This analysis reveals a pattern of spreading 
cortical thinning associated with increasing levels of tau pathology in the 
presence of elevated amyloid beta, with apparent epicenters in the 
transentorhinal region and inferior hippocampal subfields. The paper concludes 
with an outlook for high-resolution imaging of the MTL in ADNI Phase 4. 
HIGHLIGHTS: As of Phase 3, the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) protocol includes a high-resolution 
T2-weighted MRI scan optimized for imaging hippocampal subfields and medial 
temporal lobe (MTL) subregions. These scans are processed by the ADNI core to 
obtain automatic segmentations of MTL subregions and to derive morphologic 
measurements. More detailed granular examination of MTL neurodegeneration in 
response to disease progression is achieved by applying surface-based modeling 
techniques. Surface-based analysis of gray matter loss in MTL subregions reveals 
increasing and spatially expanding patterns of neurodegeneration with advancing 
stages of Alzheimer's disease (AD), as defined based on amyloid and tau positron 
emission tomography biomarkers in accordance with recently proposed criteria. 
These patterns closely align with post mortem literature on spread of 
pathological tau in AD, supporting the role of tau pathology in the presence of 
elevated levels of amyloid beta as the driver of neurodegeneration.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14161
PMCID: PMC11567830
PMID: 39279366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: David A. Wolk has served as a paid consultant to 
Eli Lilly, GE Healthcare, and Qynapse. He serves on DSMBs for Functional 
Neuromodulation and Glaxo Smith Kline. He is a site investigator for a clinical 
trial sponsored by Biogen. Sandhitsu R. Das received consultation fees from 
Rancho Biosciences and Nia Therapeutics. Long Xie is a paid employee of Siemens 
Healthineers. The other authors have nothing to disclose. Author disclosures are 
available in the supporting information.


10. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Oct;20(10):7350-7360. doi: 10.1002/alz.14166. Epub 2024 
Sep 11.

Overview of ADNI MRI.

Jack CR Jr(1), Arani A(1), Borowski BJ(1), Cash DM(2), Crawford K(3), Das SR(4), 
DeCarli C(5), Fletcher E(5), Fox NC(2), Gunter JL(1), Ittyerah R(6), Harvey 
DJ(7), Jahanshad N(8), Maillard P(5), Malone IB(2), Nir TM(8), Reid RI(1), Reyes 
DA(1), Schwarz CG(1), Senjem ML(9), Thomas DL(10), Thompson PM(3), Tosun D(11), 
Yushkevich PA(6), Ward CP(1), Weiner MW(11); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Dementia Research Centre, University College London Institute of Neurology, 
Queen Square, London, UK.
(3)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging (LONI), University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of California, Davis, California, USA.
(6)Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(7)Department of Public Health Sciences, Division of Biostatistics, University 
of California, Davis, California, USA.
(8)Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(9)Department of Information Technology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(10)Department of Brain Repair and Rehabilitation, UCL Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology, London, UK.
(11)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.

The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) Core has been operating since Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative's (ADNI) inception, providing 20 years of data 
including reliable, multi-platform standardized protocols, carefully curated 
image data, and quantitative measures provided by expert investigators. The 
overarching purposes of the MRI Core include: (1) optimizing and standardizing 
MRI acquisition methods, which have been adopted by many multicenter studies and 
trials worldwide and (2) providing curated images and numeric summary values 
from relevant MRI sequences/contrasts to the scientific community. Over time, 
ADNI MRI has become increasingly complex. To remain technically current, the 
ADNI MRI protocol has changed substantially over the past two decades. The ADNI 
4 protocol contains nine different imaging types (e.g., three dimensional [3D] 
T1-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery [FLAIR]). Our view is that 
the ADNI MRI data are a greatly underutilized resource. The purpose of this 
paper is to educate the scientific community on ADNI MRI methods and content to 
promote greater awareness, accessibility, and use. HIGHLIGHTS: The MRI Core 
provides multi-platform standardized protocols, carefully curated image data, 
and quantitative analysis by expert groups. The ADNI MRI protocol has undergone 
major changes over the past two decades to remain technically current. As of 
April 25, 2024, the following numbers of image series are available: 17,141 3D 
T1w; 6877 FLAIR; 3140 T2/PD; 6623 GRE; 3237 dMRI; 2846 ASL; 2968 TF-fMRI; and 
2861 HighResHippo (see Table 1 for abbreviations). As of April 25, 2024, the 
following numbers of quantitative analyses are available: FreeSurfer 10,997; BSI 
6120; tensor based morphometry (TBM) and TBM-SYN 12,019; WMH 9944; dMRI 1913; 
ASL 925; TF-fMRI NFQ 2992; and medial temporal subregion volumes 2726 (see Table 
4 for abbreviations). ADNI MRI is an underutilized resource that could be more 
useful to the research community.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14166
PMCID: PMC11485416
PMID: 39258539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Arvin Arani, Bret Borowski, Evan Fletcher, Nick 
Fox, Jeffrey Gunter, Ranjit Ittyerah, Neda Jahanshad, Pauline Maillard, Robert 
Reid, Denise Reyes, and Matthew Senjem have nothing to disclose. Dave Cash has 
nothing to disclose. He is supported by the UK Dementia Research Institute, 
which receives its funding from DRI Ltd, funded by the UK Medical Research 
Council, Alzheimer's Society and Alzheimer's Research UK, Alzheimer's 
Association (SG‐666374‐UK BIRTH COHORT), and the National Institute for Health 
and Care Research University College London Hospitals Biomedical Research 
Centre. He is also partly funded under NIH/ADNI 4 grant through the money Nick 
Fox receives for his work. Karen Crawford has no funding interests to disclose. 
Sandhitsu Das has no relevant disclosures. He receives funding for AG072796. 
Charles DeCarli receives funding from U01 AG024904, P30 AG072972. He has no 
conflicts. Dr. Harvey receives research funding from the NIH, related and 
unrelated to this work, and serves as statistical advisor to PLOS ONE. Ian B. 
Malone is supported by grants to his institution from NIH and is an employee of 
the Dementia Research Centre, which is supported by Alzheimer's Research UK, 
Brain Research Trust, and The Wolfson Foundation. Talia Nir has nothing to 
disclose. Funding from AARG‐23‐1149996. Dr. Schwarz receives research funding 
from the NIH (R01 AG068206), related and unrelated to this study. David L. 
Thomas is supported by the UCLH NIHR Biomedical Research Centre. He has no 
conflicts or disclosures. Paul Thompson was supported in part by the National 
Institute on Aging (NIA) grant RF1 AG057892. He has no disclosures. Duygu Tosin 
receives grant funding from the National Institutes of Health. Paul Yushkevich 
has nothing to disclose. His major grants are RF1 AG056014, RF1 AG069474, P30 
AG072979. Chadwick Ward has no conflicts. Dr. Weiner serves on editorial boards 
for Alzheimer's & Dementia and the Journal for Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease 
(JPAD). He has served on advisory boards for Acumen Pharmaceutical, Alzheon, 
Inc., Amsterdam UMC; MIRIADE, Cerecin, Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., NC Registry 
for Brain Health, and REGEnLIFE. He also serves on the USC ACTC grant, which 
receives funding from Eisai. He has provided consulting to Boxer Capital, LLC, 
Cerecin, Inc., Clario, Dementia Society of Japan, Dolby Family Ventures, Eisai, 
Guidepoint, Health and Wellness Partners, Indiana University, LCN Consulting, 
MEDA Corp., Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., NC Registry for Brain Health, Prova 
Education, T3D Therapeutics, University of Southern California (USC), and WebMD. 
He has acted as a speaker/lecturer for China Association for Alzheimer's Disease 
(CAAD) and Taipei Medical University, as well as a speaker/lecturer with 
academic travel funding provided by: AD/PD Congress, Amsterdam UMC, Cleveland 
Clinic, CTAD Congress, Foundation of Learning; Health Society (Japan), Kenes, U. 
Penn, U. Toulouse, Japan Society for Dementia Research, Korean Dementia Society, 
Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology (NCGG; 
Japan), and University of Southern California (USC). He holds stock options with 
Alzeca, Alzheon, Inc., ALZPath, Inc., and Anven. Dr. Weiner received support for 
his research from the following funding sources: National Institutes of Health 
(NIH)/NINDS/National Institute on Aging (NIA), Department of Defense (DOD), 
California Department of Public Health (CDPH), University of Michigan, Siemens, 
Biogen, Hillblom Foundation, Alzheimer's Association, Johnson & Johnson, Kevin 
and Connie Shanahan, GE, VUmc, Australian Catholic University (HBI‐BHR), The 
Stroke Foundation, and the Veterans Administration. Author disclosures are 
available in the Supporting information.


11. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Oct;20(10):7331-7339. doi: 10.1002/alz.14159. Epub 2024 
Aug 14.

Contributions of the ADNI Biostatistics Core.

Beckett LA(1), Saito N(1), Donohue MC(2), Harvey DJ(1); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of California, Davis, 
California, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.

The goal of the Biostatistics Core of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) has been to ensure that sound study designs and statistical 
methods are used to meet the overall goals of ADNI. We have supported the 
creation of a well-validated and well-curated longitudinal database of clinical 
and biomarker information on ADNI participants and helped to make this 
accessible and usable for researchers. We have developed a statistical 
methodology for characterizing the trajectories of clinical and biomarker change 
for ADNI participants across the spectrum from cognitively normal to dementia, 
including multivariate patterns and evidence for heterogeneity in cognitive 
aging. We have applied these methods and adapted them to improve clinical trial 
design. ADNI-4 will offer us a chance to help extend these efforts to a more 
diverse cohort with an even richer panel of biomarker data to support better 
knowledge of and treatment for Alzheimer's disease and related dementias. 
HIGHLIGHTS: The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) Biostatistics 
Core provides study design and analytic support to ADNI investigators. Core 
members develop and apply novel statistical methodology to work with ADNI data 
and support clinical trial design. The Core contributes to the standardization, 
validation, and harmonization of biomarker data. The Core serves as a resource 
to the wider research community to address questions related to the data and 
study as a whole.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14159
PMCID: PMC11485306
PMID: 39140601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Beckett, Dr. Harvey, Dr. Donohue, and Ms. 
Saito receive support from research grants from NIH. Dr. Harvey serves as a 
Statistical Advisor for PLOS ONE. Author disclosures are available in the 
supporting information.


12. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Oct;20(10):7320-7330. doi: 10.1002/alz.14099. Epub 2024 
Aug 14.

The informatics of ADNI.

Toga AW(1), Neu S(1), Sheehan ST(1), Crawford K(1); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging (LONI), Stevens Neuroimaging and Informatics 
Institute, Keck School of Medicine of USC, University of Southern California, 
Los Angeles, California, USA.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) has revolutionized the 
landscape of Alzheimer's research through its Informatics Core, which has 
facilitated unprecedented data standardization and sharing. Over 20 years, 
ADNI established a robust informatics framework, enabling the validation of 
biomarkers and supporting global research efforts. The Informatics Core, 
centered at the Laboratory of Neuro Imaging (LONI), provides a comprehensive 
data hub that ensures data quality, accessibility, and security, fostering over 
5600 publications and significant scientific advancements. By embracing open 
data sharing principles, ADNI set a gold standard in data transparency, allowing 
over 26,000 investigators from 169 countries to access and download a wealth of 
multimodal data. This collaborative approach not only accelerated biomarker 
discovery and drug development and advanced our understanding of Alzheimer's 
disease but also has served as a model for other research initiatives, 
demonstrating the transformative potential of carefully designed informatics 
models and shared data in driving global scientific progress. HIGHLIGHTS: 
Accelerating biomarker discovery and drug development for Alzheimer's disease. 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative's (ADNI's) open data sharing drives 
scientific progress. Data exploration and coupled analytics to data archives.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14099
PMCID: PMC11485413
PMID: 39140398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors has any conflicts to 
disclose. The National Institutes of Health supported this effort. Author 
disclosures are available in the supporting information.


13. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Oct;20(10):7361-7368. doi: 10.1002/alz.14167. Epub 2024 
Aug 13.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative Clinical Core.

Aisen PS(1), Donohue MC(1), Raman R(1), Rafii MS(1), Petersen RC(2); Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute, University of Southern 
California, San Diego, California, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) Clinical Core is 
responsible for coordination of all clinical activities at the ADNI sites, 
including project management, regulatory oversight, and site management and 
monitoring, as well as the collection of all clinical data and management of all 
study data. The Clinical Core is also charged with determining the clinical 
classifications and criteria for enrollment in evolving AD trials and enabling 
the ongoing characterization of the cross-sectional features and longitudinal 
trajectories of the ADNI cohorts with application of these findings to optimal 
clinical trial designs. More than 2400 individuals have been enrolled in the 
cohorts since the inception of ADNI, facilitating refinement of our 
understanding of the AD trajectory and allowing academic and industry 
investigators to model therapeutic trials across the disease spectrum from the 
presymptomatic stage through dementia. HIGHLIGHTS: Since 2004, the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) Clinical Core has overseen the enrollment 
of > 2400 participants with mild cognitive impairment, mild Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) dementia, and normal cognition. The longitudinal dataset has elucidated the 
full cognitive and clinical trajectory of AD from its presymptomatic stage 
through the onset of dementia. The ADNI data have supported the design of most 
major trials in the field.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14167
PMCID: PMC11485391
PMID: 39136045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Aisen has research grants from NIH, Lilly, 
and Eisai, and consults with Merck, Roche, BMS, Genentech, Abbvie, Biogen, 
ImmunoBrain Checkpoint, Arrowhead, AltPep, and Neurimmune. Dr. Donohue has 
research grants from Eisai and Lilly, consults with Roche, and owns stock in 
Janssen. His wife is employed by Janssen. Dr. Raman has research grants from 
Eisai, Lilly, the American Heart Association, and the Alzheimer's Association. 
Dr. Rafii has research grants from Eisai and Lilly, consults with AC Immune and 
Ionis, and serves on an advisory board for Alzheon, Aptah Bio, Biohaven, 
Keystone Bio, Prescient Imaging, Positrigo, and Embic. Dr. Petersen has 
consulted for Roche Inc., Eli Lilly and Co., Eisai Inc., Nestle Inc., and 
Genentech Inc. Author disclosures are available in the supporting information.


14. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Sep;20(9):6615-6621. doi: 10.1002/alz.14162. Epub 2024 
Aug 8.

Design and validation of the ADNI MR protocol.

Arani A(1), Borowski B(1), Felmlee J(1), Reid RI(1), Thomas DL(2), Gunter JL(1), 
Stables L(3), Buckner RL(4), Jung Y(5), Tosun D(3), Weiner M(3), Jack CR Jr(1); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Department of Brain Repair and Rehabilitation, UCL Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology, University College London, London, UK.
(3)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California Davis, Davis, 
California, USA.

Phase four of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI4) magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) protocols aim to maintain longitudinal consistency 
across two decades of data acquisition, while adopting new technologies. Here we 
describe and justify the study's design and targeted biomarkers. The ADNI4 MRI 
protocol includes nine MRI sequences. Some sequences require the latest hardware 
and software system upgrades and are continuously rolled out as they become 
available at each site. The main sequence additions/changes in ADNI4 are: (1) 
compressed sensing (CS) T1-weighting, (2) pseudo-continuous arterial spin 
labeling (ASL) on all three vendors (GE, Siemens, Philips), (3) 
multiple-post-labeling-delay ASL, (4) 1 mm3 isotropic 3D fluid-attenuated 
inversion recovery, and (5) CS 3D T2-weighted. ADNI4 aims to help the 
neuroimaging community extract valuable imaging biomarkers and provide a 
database to test the impact of advanced imaging strategies on diagnostic 
accuracy and disease sensitivity among individuals lying on the cognitively 
normal to impaired spectrum. HIGHLIGHTS: A summary of MRI protocols for phase 
four of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI 4). The design and 
justification for the ADNI 4 MRI protocols. Compressed sensing and multi-band 
advances have been applied to improve scan time. ADNI4 protocols aim to 
streamline safety screening and therapy monitoring. The ADNI4 database will be a 
valuable test bed for academic research.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14162
PMCID: PMC11497751
PMID: 39115941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Arani, Mr. Borowski, Mr. Felmlee, Dr. Reid, 
Dr. Thomas, Dr. Gunter, Dr. Stables, Dr. Buckner, Dr. Jung, Dr. Tosun, and Dr. 
Jack have no conflicts to declare. Dr. Jack, Dr. Arani, Mr. Borowski, Mr. 
Felmlee, Dr. Reid, and Dr. Gunter are employed by Mayo Clinic. Within the past 
36 months, Dr. Jack has served on a DSMB for Roche pro bono; no payments to the 
individual or institution were involved. He has received funding from the 
Alzheimer's Association for travel. In addition, he holds index funds. Dr. 
Thomas is supported by the UCLH NIHR Biomedical Research Centre. Dr. Weiner 
serves on editorial boards for Alzheimer's & Dementia, MRI, and TMRI. He has 
served on advisory boards for Acumen Pharmaceutical, ADNI, Alzheon, Inc., 
Biogen, Brain Health Registry, Cerecin, Dolby Family Ventures, Eli Lilly, Merck 
Sharp & Dohme Corp., National Institute on Aging(NIA),Nestle/Nestec, PCORI/PPRN, 
Roche, University of Southern California (USC), and NervGen. He has provided 
consulting to Baird Equity Capital, BioClinica, Cerecin, Inc., Cytox, Dolby 
Family Ventures, Duke University, Eisai, FUJIFILM‐Toyama Chemical (Japan), 
Garfield Weston, Genentech, Guide point Global, Indiana University, Japanese 
Organization for Medical Device Development, Inc. (JOMDD), Medscape, 
Nestle/Nestec, NIH, Peerview Internal Medicine, Roche, T3D Therapeutics, 
University of Southern California (USC), and Vida Ventures. He has acted as a 
speaker/lecturer to The Buck Institute for Research on Aging, China Association 
for Alzheimer's Disease (CAAD), Japan Society for Dementia Research, and Korean 
Dementia Society. He holds stock options with Alzheon, Inc., Alzeca, and Anven. 
The following entities have provided funding for academic travel: University of 
Southern California (USC), NervGen, ASFNR, and CTAD Congress. Author disclosures 
are available in the supporting information.


15. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Oct;20(10):7340-7349. doi: 10.1002/alz.14165. Epub 2024 
Aug 6.

The ADNI PET Core at 20.

Jagust WJ(1), Koeppe RA(2), Rabinovici GD(3), Villemagne VL(4), Harrison TM(1), 
Landau SM(1); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of California, Berkeley, California, 
USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, California, 
USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
USA.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) PET Core has evolved over 
time, beginning with positron emission tomography (PET) imaging of a subsample 
of participants with [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET, adding tracers for 
measurement of β-amyloid, followed by tau tracers. This review examines the 
evolution of the ADNI PET Core, the novel aspects of PET imaging in each stage 
of ADNI, and gives an accounting of PET images available in the ADNI database. 
The ADNI PET Core has been and continues to be a rich resource that provides 
quantitative PET data and preprocessed PET images to the scientific community, 
allowing interrogation of both basic and clinically relevant questions. By 
standardizing methods across different PET scanners and multiple PET tracers, 
the Core has demonstrated the feasibility of large-scale, multi-center PET 
studies. Data managed and disseminated by the PET Core has been critical to 
defining pathophysiological models of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and helped to 
drive methods used in modern therapeutic trials. HIGHLIGHTS: The ADNI PET Core 
began with FDG-PET and now includes three amyloid and three tau PET ligands. The 
PET Core has standardized acquisition and analysis of multitracer PET images. 
The ADNI PET Core helped to develop methods that have facilitated clinical 
trials in AD.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14165
PMCID: PMC11485322
PMID: 39108002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Jagust receives research funding from the 
NIH and Genentech, has consulted for Lilly, Biogen, Clario, and Eisai and holds 
equity in Molecular Medicine and Optoceutics. Dr. Rabinovici receives research 
support from Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, Life Molecular Imaging, GE Healthcare, 
and Genentech. In the past 2 years, he has served as a paid consultant to 
Alector, Eli Lilly, Johnson & Johnson, and Merck. Dr. Landau receives research 
funding from the NIH, is on the DSMB and SAB for KeifeRx and the NIH IPAT study, 
has received speaking honoraria from Eisai and IMPACT‐AD, has consulted for 
Banner Health and Vaccinex and has received travel funding and other research 
support from IMPACT‐AD and the Alzheimer's Association. Dr. Villemagne has 
received research grants from NHMRC (GNT2001320), the Aging Mind 
Foundation (DAF2255207), and NIH 2P01AG025204‐16) and has been a consultant or 
paid speaker at sponsored conference sessions for Eli Lilly, Life Molecular 
Imaging, ACE Barcelona, IXICO, and AC Immune. Drs. Harrison and Koeppe report no 
conflicts of interest. Author disclosures are available in the Supporting 
information.


16. Artif Intell Med. 2024 Aug;154:102928. doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2024.102928. Epub 
2024 Jul 2.

A systematic literature review on the significance of deep learning and machine 
learning in predicting Alzheimer's disease.

Kaur A(1), Mittal M(1), Bhatti JS(2), Thareja S(3), Singh S(4).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Computer Science & Technology, Central University of Punjab, 
Bathinda, India.
(2)Dept. of Human Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Central University of Punjab, 
Bathinda, India.
(3)Dept. of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Natural Products, Central University of 
Punjab, Bathinda, India.
(4)Dept. of Computer Science & Technology, Central University of Punjab, 
Bathinda, India. Electronic address: satwinder.singh@cup.edu.in.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most prevalent cause of dementia, 
characterized by a steady decline in mental, behavioral, and social abilities 
and impairs a person's capacity for independent functioning. It is a fatal 
neurodegenerative disease primarily affecting older adults.
OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this literature review is to investigate various AD 
detection techniques, datasets, input modalities, algorithms, libraries, and 
performance evaluation metrics used to determine which model or strategy may 
provide superior performance.
METHOD: The initial search yielded 807 papers, but only 100 research articles 
were chosen after applying the inclusion-exclusion criteria. This SLR analyzed 
research items published between January 2019 and December 2022. The ACM, 
Elsevier, IEEE Xplore Digital Library, PubMed, Springer and Taylor & Francis 
were systematically searched. The current study considers articles that used 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Positron Emission Tomography (PET), APOe4 
genotype, Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) 
biomarkers. The study was performed following Preferred Reporting Items for 
Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) guidelines.
CONCLUSION: According to the literature survey, most studies (n = 76) used the 
DL strategy. The datasets used by studies were primarily derived from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. The majority of 
studies (n = 73) used single-modality neuroimaging data, while the remaining 
used multi-modal input data. In a multi-modality approach, the combination of 
MRI and PET scans is commonly preferred. Also, Regarding the algorithm used, 
Convolution Neural Network (CNN) showed the highest accuracy, 100 %, in 
classifying AD vs. CN subjects whereas the SVM was the most common ML algorithm, 
with a maximum accuracy of 99.82 %.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.artmed.2024.102928
PMID: 39029377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


17. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2024 Sep;78(9):491-494. doi: 10.1111/pcn.13681. Epub 
2024 Jun 6.

Development of disease-modifying therapies against Alzheimer's disease.

Iwatsubo T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Japan.
(2)National Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and 
Psychiatry, Kodaira, Japan.

To successfully develop disease-modifying therapies (DMT) against Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), it is important to target the mild stage of the disease, before 
the pathological changes progress and dementia symptoms are fully manifested. To 
this end, the AD Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), a large-scale observational 
study, was initiated in the U.S. with the goal of development of DMT that are 
effective in the early stages of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) by utilizing 
imaging and biomarkers. In Japan, J-ADNI enrolled and followed up 537 patients, 
mainly with MCI, and established a platform for evaluation including amyloid 
PET, and demonstrated a high similarity in the clinical course of 
amyloid-positive MCI (prodromal AD) in Japan and the U.S. In 2023, the anti-Aβ 
antibody lecanemab successfully completed a Phase III clinical trial for early 
AD (prodromal AD + mild AD dementia) and was granted regulatory approval and 
made available both in the US and Japan. Also, phase III trial of donanemab was 
completed successful. The J-TRC study was initiated in Japan as a "trial ready 
cohort (TRC)" consisting of participants who met the eligibility criteria for 
participation in preclinical and prodromal AD trials. Based on such a platform, 
the development of DMT for AD will progress more rapidly in the future.

© 2024 The Authors. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences published by John 
Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Japanese Society of Psychiatry and 
Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/pcn.13681
PMCID: PMC11488598
PMID: 38842037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Jan;20(1):695-708. doi: 10.1002/alz.13483. Epub 2023 Sep 
29.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative and the role and contributions 
of the Private Partners Scientific Board (PPSB).

Albala B(1), Appelmans E(2), Burress R(3), De Santi S(1)(4), Devins T(1), Klein 
G(5), Logovinsky V(1), Novak GP(3), Ribeiro K(6), Schmidt ME(7), Schwarz AJ(8), 
Scott D(9), Shcherbinin S(10), Siemers E(11), Travaglia A(2), Weber CJ(12), 
White L(2), Wolf-Rodda J(2), Vasanthakumar A(6).

Author information:
(1)Eisai Inc., Nutley, New Jersey, USA.
(2)Foundation for the National Institutes of Health, North Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.
(3)Janssen Research & Development, LLC, Titusville, New Jersey, USA.
(4)Life Molecular Imaging, Berlin, Germany.
(5)F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)AbbVie Inc., North Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(7)Janssen Research & Development, Beerse, Belgium.
(8)Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Ltd., Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(9)Clario, San Mateo, California, USA.
(10)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(11)Cogstate Ltd, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(12)Alzheimer's Association, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) Private Partners 
Scientific Board (PPSB) encompasses members from industry, biotechnology, 
diagnostic, and non-profit organizations that have until recently been managed 
by the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health (FNIH) and provided 
financial and scientific support to ADNI programs. In this article, we review 
some of the major activities undertaken by the PPSB, focusing on those 
supporting the most recently completed National Institute on Aging grant, ADNI3, 
and the impact it has had on streamlining biomarker discovery and validation in 
Alzheimer's disease. We also provide a perspective on the gaps that may be 
filled with future PPSB activities as part of ADNI4 and beyond. HIGHLIGHTS: The 
Private Partners Scientific board (PPSB) continues to play a key role in 
enabling several Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) activities. 
PPSB working groups have led landscape assessments to provide valuable feedback 
on new technologies, platforms, and methods that may be taken up by ADNI in 
current or future iterations.

© 2023 AbbVie Inc. Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.13483
PMCID: PMC10843521
PMID: 37774088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: B.A., E.A., A.T., C.J.W., L.W., and J.W.R. have 
no conflicts to report. R.B. and A.J.S. are employees of Takeda Pharmaceuticals. 
S.D.S. is an employee of Eisai. T.D. is an employee of Cognition Therapeutics. 
G.K. is an employee of F. Hoffman La‐Roche. V.L. is an employee of Lundbeck. 
G.P.N. and M.E.S. are employees of Janssen Research & Dev. K.R. and A.V. are 
employees of Abbvie. D.S. is an employee of Clario. S.S. is an employee of Eli 
Lilly. E.S. has served as a consultant with Biogen Inc., Cogstate Ltd., 
Cortexyme Inc., Partner Therapeutics Inc., Pinteon Therapeutics Inc., Vaccinex 
Inc., Acumen Pharmaceuticals Inc., Gates Ventures LLC, Hoffman La Roche Ltd. 
Author disclosures are available in the supporting information.


19. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Jan;20(1):652-694. doi: 10.1002/alz.13449. Epub 2023 Sep 
12.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative in the era of Alzheimer's 
disease treatment: A review of ADNI studies from 2021 to 2022.

Veitch DP(1)(2), Weiner MW(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Miller M(1)(2), Aisen PS(7), Ashford 
MA(1), Beckett LA(8), Green RC(9), Harvey D(8), Jack CR Jr(10), Jagust W(11), 
Landau SM(11), Morris JC(12)(13)(14), Nho KT(15)(16), Nosheny R(2)(5), Okonkwo 
O(17), Perrin RJ(12)(13)(14), Petersen RC(18), Rivera Mindt M(19)(20), Saykin 
A(15)(21), Shaw LM(22), Toga AW(23), Tosun D(2)(3); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Northern California Institute 
for Research and Education (NCIRE), San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, California, 
USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of California, 
San Francisco, California, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, California, 
USA.
(7)Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute, University of Southern 
California, San Diego, California, USA.
(8)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Sciences, University 
of California, Davis, California, USA.
(9)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Broad Institute Ariadne Labs and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(10)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(11)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California, USA.
(12)Knight Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA.
(13)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(14)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA.
(15)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences and the Indiana Alzheimer's 
Disease Research Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
Indiana, USA.
(16)Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(17)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Disease Research Center and Department of Medicine, 
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, 
Wisconsin, USA.
(18)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(19)Department of Psychology, Latin American and Latino Studies Institute, 
African and African American Studies, Fordham University, New York, New York, 
USA.
(20)Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
New York, USA.
(21)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(22)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and the PENN Alzheimer's 
Disease Research Center, Center for Neurodegenerative Research, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(23)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Institute of Neuroimaging and Informatics, Keck 
School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) aims to improve 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) clinical trials. Since 2006, ADNI has shared clinical, 
neuroimaging, and cognitive data, and biofluid samples. We used conventional 
search methods to identify 1459 publications from 2021 to 2022 using ADNI 
data/samples and reviewed 291 impactful studies. This review details how ADNI 
studies improved disease progression understanding and clinical trial 
efficiency. Advances in subject selection, detection of treatment effects, 
harmonization, and modeling improved clinical trials and plasma biomarkers like 
phosphorylated tau showed promise for clinical use. Biomarkers of amyloid beta, 
tau, neurodegeneration, inflammation, and others were prognostic with 
individualized prediction algorithms available online. Studies supported the 
amyloid cascade, emphasized the importance of neuroinflammation, and detailed 
widespread heterogeneity in disease, linked to genetic and vascular risk, 
co-pathologies, sex, and resilience. Biological subtypes were consistently 
observed. Generalizability of ADNI results is limited by lack of cohort 
diversity, an issue ADNI-4 aims to address by enrolling a diverse cohort.

© 2023 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.13449
PMCID: PMC10841343
PMID: 37698424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Ashford, Dr. Beckett, Dr. Jack, Dr. Miller, 
Dr. Morris, Dr. Nho, Dr. Okonkwo, Dr. Perrin, Dr. Toga, Dr. Tosun, and Dr. 
Veitch have no conflicts to declare. Dr. Aisen has research grants from NIH, 
Lilly, and Eisai, and consults with Merck, Roche, Genentech, Abbvie, Biogen, 
ImmunoBrain Checkpoint, and Arrowhead. Dr. Green has received compensation for 
advising the following companies: Allelica, Atria, Fabric, Genome Web, Genomic 
Life, Grail, Verily, and VinBigData and is co‐founder of Genome Medical and 
Nurture Genomics. Dr. Harvey serves as a Statistical Advisor for PLOS ONE. Dr. 
Jagust serves as a consultant to Eisai, Roche, Biogen, Prothena, and Lilly. Dr. 
Landau has received travel funding from the Alzheimer's Association, served on 
the Scientific Advisory Board and DSMB for KeifeRx, and has received speaker 
fees from Eisai, Inc. Dr. Nosheny receives support in the form of grants to UCSF 
from NIH, The Alzheimer's Association, and Genentech, Inc. Dr. Petersen has 
consulted for Roche, Inc., Merck, Inc., Biogen, Inc., Eisai, Inc., Nestle, Inc., 
and Genentech, Inc. Dr. Rivera Mindt serves on the following boards: ALL‐FTD 
External Advisory Board, Brown University Carney Center, Harlem Community and 
Academic Partnership, Mayo Clinic Alzheimer's Disease Research Center Advisory 
Board, National Centralized Repository for AD RD (NCRAD) Committee, Natives 
Engaged in Alzheimer's Research (NEAR) Study Data Safety Monitoring Board, South 
Texas Alzheimer's Disease Research Center (ADRC) External Advisory Board, 
University of California, San Francisco Alzheimer's Disease Research Center 
Advisory Board, University of Texas Rio Grande Valley Resource Center For 
Minority Aging Research Advisory Board, and University of Washington ADRC 
External Advisory Board. Dr. Saykin has received support from Avid 
Radiopharmaceuticals, a subsidiary of Eli Lilly (in kind contribution of PET 
tracer precursor) and consulting fees from Bayer Oncology (Scientific Advisory 
Board), Eisai (Scientific Advisory Board), Siemens Medical Solutions USA, Inc. 
(Dementia Advisory Board), Springer‐Nature Publishing (Editorial Office Support 
as Editor‐in‐Chief, Brain Imaging and Behavior). Dr. Shaw receives support Roche 
(IIS and in‐kind reagents and instrumentation support for CSF AD biomarkers); he 
has received honoraria from Roche, Biogen, and Fujirebio for participation in 
teaching programs; and served on Advisory Boards for Roche and Biogen. Dr. 
Weiner serves on Editorial Boards for Alzheimer's & Dementia, MRI and TMRI. He 
has served on Advisory Boards for Acumen Pharmaceutical, ADNI, Alzheon, Inc., 
Biogen, Brain Health Registry, Cerecin, Dolby Family Ventures, Eli Lilly, Merck 
Sharp & Dohme Corp., National Institute on Aging (NIA), Nestle/Nestec, 
PCORI/PPRN, Roche, University of Southern California (USC), NervGen. He has 
provided consulting to Baird Equity Capital, BioClinica, Cerecin, Inc., Cytox, 
Dolby Family Ventures, Duke University, Eisai, FUJIFILM‐Toyama Chemical (Japan), 
Garfield Weston, Genentech, Guidepoint Global, Indiana University, Japanese 
Organization for Medical Device Development, Inc. (JOMDD), Medscape, 
Nestle/Nestec, NIH, Peerview Internal Medicine, Roche, T3D Therapeutics, 
University of Southern California (USC), and Vida Ventures. He has acted as a 
speaker/lecturer to The Buck Institute for Research on Aging, China Association 
for Alzheimer's Disease (CAAD), Japan Society for Dementia Research, and Korean 
Dementia Society. He holds stock options with Alzheon, Inc., Alzeca, and Anven. 
The following entities have provided funding for academic travel: University of 
Southern California (USC), NervGen, ASFNR, and CTAD Congress. Author disclosures 
are available in the supporting information.


20. Alzheimers Dement. 2023 Dec;19(12):5885-5904. doi: 10.1002/alz.13412. Epub 2023 
Aug 10.

Artificial intelligence for diagnostic and prognostic neuroimaging in dementia: 
A systematic review.

Borchert RJ(1)(2), Azevedo T(3), Badhwar A(4)(5), Bernal J(6)(7)(8), Betts 
M(7)(8)(9), Bruffaerts R(10)(11), Burkhart MC(12), Dewachter I(11), Gellersen 
HM(8)(12), Low A(13), Lourida I(14), Machado L(15), Madan CR(16), Malpetti M(1), 
Mejia J(17), Michopoulou S(18), Muñoz-Neira C(19)(20), Pepys J(1)(21), Peres 
M(1), Phillips V(22), Ramanan S(23), Tamburin S(24), Tantiangco HM(25), Thakur 
L(26)(27)(28), Tomassini A(23), Vipin A(29), Tang E(30), Newby D(31); Deep 
Dementia Phenotyping (DEMON) Network; Ranson JM(14), Llewellyn DJ(14)(32), 
Veldsman M(33), Rittman T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Montreal, Montreal, 
Canada.
(5)Centre de recherche de l'Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie (CRIUGM), 
Montreal, Canada.
(6)Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, 
UK.
(7)Institute of Cognitive Neurology and Dementia Research, Otto-von-Guericke 
University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany.
(8)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Magdeburg, Germany.
(9)Center for Behavioral Brain Sciences, University of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, 
Germany.
(10)Computational Neurology, Experimental Neurobiology Unit, Department of 
Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(11)Biomedical Research Institute, Hasselt University, Diepenbeek, Belgium.
(12)Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(13)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(14)University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, UK.
(15)Department of Biochemistry, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto 
Alegre, Brazil.
(16)School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(17)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Universidad de Los Andes, Bogotá, 
Colombia.
(18)Imaging Physics, University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, 
Southampton, UK.
(19)Research into Memory, Brain sciences and dementia Group (ReMemBr Group), 
Translational Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol, 
Bristol, UK.
(20)Artificial Intelligence & Computational Neuroscience Group (AICN Group), 
Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience (SITraN), Department of 
Neuroscience, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(21)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele, 
Italy.
(22)University of Cambridge Medical Library, Cambridge, UK.
(23)Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(24)Department of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University 
of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(25)Information School, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(26)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(27)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, UK.
(28)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(29)Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
(30)Population Health Sciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, UK.
(31)Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(32)Alan Turing Institute, London, UK.
(33)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Artificial intelligence (AI) and neuroimaging offer new 
opportunities for diagnosis and prognosis of dementia.
METHODS: We systematically reviewed studies reporting AI for neuroimaging in 
diagnosis and/or prognosis of cognitive neurodegenerative diseases.
RESULTS: A total of 255 studies were identified. Most studies relied on the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative dataset. Algorithmic classifiers 
were the most commonly used AI method (48%) and discriminative models performed 
best for differentiating Alzheimer's disease from controls. The accuracy of 
algorithms varied with the patient cohort, imaging modalities, and stratifiers 
used. Few studies performed validation in an independent cohort.
DISCUSSION: The literature has several methodological limitations including lack 
of sufficient algorithm development descriptions and standard definitions. We 
make recommendations to improve model validation including addressing key 
clinical questions, providing sufficient description of AI methods and 
validating findings in independent datasets. Collaborative approaches between 
experts in AI and medicine will help achieve the promising potential of AI tools 
in practice.
HIGHLIGHTS: There has been a rapid expansion in the use of machine learning for 
diagnosis and prognosis in neurodegenerative disease Most studies (71%) relied 
on the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset with no other 
individual dataset used more than five times There has been a recent rise in the 
use of more complex discriminative models (e.g., neural networks) that performed 
better than other classifiers for classification of AD vs healthy controls We 
make recommendations to address methodological considerations, addressing key 
clinical questions, and validation We also make recommendations for the field 
more broadly to standardize outcome measures, address gaps in the literature, 
and monitor sources of bias.

© 2023 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.13412
PMID: 37563912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Acad Radiol. 2023 Feb;30(2):159-182. doi: 10.1016/j.acra.2022.10.026. Epub 2022 
Dec 1.

Multiparametric Quantitative Imaging Biomarker as a Multivariate Descriptor of 
Health: A Roadmap.

Raunig DL(1), Pennello GA(2), Delfino JG(3), Buckler AJ(4), Hall TJ(5), 
Guimaraes AR(6), Wang X(7), Huang EP(8), Barnhart HX(9), deSouza N(10), 
Obuchowski N(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistical and Quantitative Sciences, Data Science Institute, 
Takeda Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Electronic address: 
draunig@snet.net.
(2)Center for Devices and Radiological Health, US Food and Drug Administration 
Division of Imaging, Diagnostic and Software Reliability, Office of Science and 
Engineering Laboratories, Center for Devices and Radiological Health, US Food 
and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland.
(3)Center for Devices and Radiological Health, US Food and Drug Administration, 
Silver Spring, Maryland.
(4)Elucid Bioimaging, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts.
(5)Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin.
(6)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Oregon Health & Sciences University, 
Portland, Oregon.
(7)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Lerner Research Institute, 
Cleveland, Ohio.
(8)Biometric Research Program, Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis - 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(9)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, 
North Carolina.
(10)Division of Radiotherapy and Imaging, the Insitute of Cancer Research and 
Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(11)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Lerner Research Institute 
Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio.

Multiparametric quantitative imaging biomarkers (QIBs) offer distinct advantages 
over single, univariate descriptors because they provide a more complete measure 
of complex, multidimensional biological systems. In disease, where structural 
and functional disturbances occur across a multitude of subsystems, multivariate 
QIBs are needed to measure the extent of system malfunction. This paper, the 
first Use Case in a series of articles on multiparameter imaging biomarkers, 
considers multiple QIBs as a multidimensional vector to represent all relevant 
disease constructs more completely. The approach proposed offers several 
advantages over QIBs as multiple endpoints and avoids combining them into a 
single composite that obscures the medical meaning of the individual 
measurements. We focus on establishing statistically rigorous methods to create 
a single, simultaneous measure from multiple QIBs that preserves the sensitivity 
of each univariate QIB while incorporating the correlation among QIBs. Details 
are provided for metrological methods to quantify the technical performance. 
Methods to reduce the set of QIBs, test the superiority of the mp-QIB model to 
any univariate QIB model, and design study strategies for generating precision 
and validity claims are also provided. QIBs of Alzheimer's Disease from the ADNI 
merge data set are used as a case study to illustrate the methods described.

Copyright © 2022 The Association of University Radiologists. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.acra.2022.10.026
PMCID: PMC9825667
PMID: 36464548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare 
that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships 
that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


22. Mol Psychiatry. 2022 Dec;27(12):5086-5095. doi: 10.1038/s41380-022-01772-8. Epub 
2022 Oct 18.

Depressive symptoms in cognitively unimpaired older adults are associated with 
lower structural and functional integrity in a frontolimbic network.

Touron E(1), Moulinet I(1), Kuhn E(1), Sherif S(1), Ourry V(1)(2), Landeau B(1), 
Mézenge F(1), Vivien D(1)(3), Klimecki OM(4), Poisnel G(1), Marchant NL(5), 
Chételat G(6); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; Medit-Ageing 
Research Group.

Collaborators: Arenaza-Urquijo EM, Allais F, André C, Asselineau J, Baez Lugo S, 
Batchelor M, Beaugonin A, Bejanin A, Champetier P, Chocat A, Collette F, 
Dautricourt S, Ferrand-Devouge E, De Flores R, De La Sayette V, Delamillieure P, 
Delarue M, Deza-Araujo YI, Esperou H, Felisatti F, Frison E, Gheysen F, Gonneaud 
J, Heidmann M, Huong Tran T, Jessen F, Krolak-Salmon P, Le Du G, Lefranc V, Lutz 
A, Molinuevo JL, Palix C, Paly L, Rauchs G, Réhel S, Requier F, Salmon E, 
Sanchez R, Schimmer C, Vanhoutte M, Vuilleumier P, Ware C, Wirth M.

Author information:
(1)Unité 1237 PhIND "Physiopathology and Imaging of Neurological Disorders", 
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Blood and Brain @ 
Caen-Normandie, GIP Cyceron, Normandie Université, Université de Caen, Caen, 
France.
(2)Unité 1077 NIMH "Neuropsychologie et Imagerie de la Mémoire Humaine," 
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Normandie Université, 
Université de Caen, PSL Université, EPHE, CHU de Caen-Normandie, GIP Cyceron, 
Caen, France.
(3)Département de Recherche Clinique, CHU de Caen-Normandie, Caen, France.
(4)Clinical Psychology and Behavioral Neuroscience, Faculty of Psychology, 
Technische Universität Dresden, 01187, Dresden, Germany.
(5)Division of Psychiatry, University College London, London, UK.
(6)Unité 1237 PhIND "Physiopathology and Imaging of Neurological Disorders", 
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Blood and Brain @ 
Caen-Normandie, GIP Cyceron, Normandie Université, Université de Caen, Caen, 
France. chetelat@cyceron.fr.

Subclinical depressive symptoms are associated with increased risk of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), but the brain mechanisms underlying this relationship 
are still unclear. We aimed to provide a comprehensive overview of the brain 
substrates of subclinical depressive symptoms in cognitively unimpaired older 
adults using complementary multimodal neuroimaging data. We included cognitively 
unimpaired older adults from the baseline data of the primary cohort Age-Well 
(n = 135), and from the replication cohort ADNI (n = 252). In both cohorts, 
subclinical depressive symptoms were assessed using the 15-item version of the 
Geriatric Depression Scale; based on this scale, participants were classified as 
having depressive symptoms (>0) or not (0). Voxel-wise between-group comparisons 
were performed to highlight differences in gray matter volume, glucose 
metabolism and amyloid deposition; as well as white matter integrity (only 
available in Age-Well). Age-Well participants with subclinical depressive 
symptoms had lower gray matter volume in the hippocampus and lower white matter 
integrity in the fornix and the posterior parts of the cingulum and corpus 
callosum, compared to participants without symptoms. Hippocampal atrophy was 
recovered in ADNI, where participants with subclinical depressive symptoms also 
showed glucose hypometabolism in the hippocampus, amygdala, precuneus/posterior 
cingulate cortex, medial and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, insula, and 
temporoparietal cortex. Subclinical depressive symptoms were not associated with 
brain amyloid deposition in either cohort. Subclinical depressive symptoms in 
ageing are linked with neurodegeneration biomarkers in the frontolimbic network 
including brain areas particularly sensitive to AD. The relationship between 
depressive symptoms and AD may be partly underpinned by neurodegeneration in 
common brain regions.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-022-01772-8
PMCID: PMC9763117
PMID: 36258017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: OK, GP, NM and GC reported grants from European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Program under grant agreement No. 
667696 during the conduct of the study. NM reported grants from a Senior 
Fellowship from the Alzheimer’s Society (AS-SF-15b-002). GC reported grants, 
personal fees and nonfinancial support from Institut National de la Santé et de 
la Recherche Médicale (INSERM); personal fees from Fondation Entrepreneurs MMA, 
grants and personal fees from Fondation Alzheimer, grants from Région Normandie, 
grants from Fondation Recherche Alzheimer, grants from Association France 
Alzheimer, outside the submitted work. No other disclosures were reported.


23. Alzheimers Dement. 2023 Jan;19(1):307-317. doi: 10.1002/alz.12797. Epub 2022 Oct 
9.

Increasing participant diversity in AD research: Plans for digital screening, 
blood testing, and a community-engaged approach in the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative 4.

Weiner MW(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Veitch DP(1)(6), Miller MJ(1)(6), Aisen PS(7), Albala 
B(8), Beckett LA(9), Green RC(10), Harvey D(9), Jack CR Jr(11), Jagust W(12), 
Landau SM(12), Morris JC(13)(14)(15), Nosheny R(1)(4), Okonkwo OC(16), Perrin 
RJ(13)(14)(15), Petersen RC(17), Rivera-Mindt M(18)(19), Saykin AJ(20)(21), Shaw 
LM(22), Toga AW(23), Tosun D(1)(2), Trojanowski JQ(22); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, California, 
USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of California, 
San Francisco, California, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, California, 
USA.
(6)Northern California Institute for Research and Education (NCIRE), Department 
of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, California, USA.
(7)Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute, University of Southern 
California, San Diego, California, USA.
(8)Department of Neurology, University of California Irvine School of Medicine, 
Irvine, California, USA.
(9)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Sciences, University 
of California, Davis, California, USA.
(10)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Broad Institute Ariadne Labs and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(11)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(12)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California, USA.
(13)Knight Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA.
(14)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(15)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA.
(16)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Disease Research Center and Department of Medicine, 
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, 
Wisconsin, USA.
(17)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(18)Department of Psychology, Latin American and Latino Studies Institute, & 
African and African American Studies, Fordham University, New York, New York, 
USA.
(19)Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
New York, USA.
(20)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences and the Indiana Alzheimer's 
Disease Research Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
IN, USA.
(21)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(22)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and the PENN Alzheimer's 
Disease Research Center, Center for Neurodegenerative Research, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(23)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Institute of Neuroimaging and Informatics, Keck 
School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) aims to 
validate biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease (AD) clinical trials. To improve 
generalizability, ADNI4 aims to enroll 50-60% of its new participants from 
underrepresented populations (URPs) using new biofluid and digital technologies. 
ADNI4 has received funding from the National Institute on Aging beginning 
September 2022.
METHODS: ADNI4 will recruit URPs using community-engaged approaches. An online 
portal will screen 20,000 participants, 4000 of whom (50-60% URPs) will be 
tested for plasma biomarkers and APOE. From this, 500 new participants will 
undergo in-clinic assessment joining 500 ADNI3 rollover participants. Remaining 
participants (∼3500) will undergo longitudinal plasma and digital cognitive 
testing. ADNI4 will add MRI sequences and new PET tracers. Project 1 will 
optimize biomarkers in AD clinical trials.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: ADNI4 will improve generalizability of results, use 
remote digital and blood screening, and continue providing longitudinal 
clinical, biomarker, and autopsy data to investigators.

© 2022 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.12797
PMCID: PMC10042173
PMID: 36209495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Aisen reports research agreements with 
Janssen, Lilly, and Eisai; grants from NIA, the Alzheimer's Association, and 
FNIH; and consulting fees from Biogen, Roche, Merck, Abbvie, Immunobrain 
Checkpoint, Rainbow Medical, and Shionogi. Dr. Albala has no conflicts to 
declare. Dr. Beckett receives support from NIH grants U01AG024904, R01AG062517, 
and B639943, and has received support from the National Institute of Justice 
(2014‐R2‐CX‐0012). Dr. Green is supported by NIH grants AG24904, HD090019, 
HG009922, HL143295, HG008685, TR003201, has received compensation for advising 
the following companies: AIA, Allelica, Embryome, Genomic Life, Grail, Humanity, 
Kneed Media, Meenta, OptumLabs, Plumcare, Verily, VinBigData; and is co‐founder 
of Genome Medical, Inc. Dr. Harvey receives support from NIH grants P30AG072972, 
U01AG024904, U54NS079202, R01AG051618, R01HD093654, R01AG062240, R01AG062689, 
R01AG064688, P50HD103526, R01HD076189, R01AG066748, R01AG067541 and a California 
Department of Public Health Alzheimer's Award (1910611‐0). She has also served 
as a consultant for NervGen Pharma Corp and receives support for serving as a 
Statistical Advisor for PLOS ONE. Dr. Jack serves on an independent data 
monitoring board for Roche, has served as a speaker for Eisai, and consulted for 
Biogen, but he receives no personal compensation from any commercial entity. He 
receives research support from NIH, the GHR Foundation, and the Alexander Family 
Alzheimer's Disease Research Professorship of the Mayo Clinic. Dr. Jagust 
receives support from NIH grants AG034570, AG062542 and AG067418. He serves as a 
consultant to Bioclinica, Biogen, and Lilly and has an equity position in 
Optoceutics. Dr. Landau has received travel funding from the Alzheimer's 
Association, served on the Scientific Advisory Board and DSMB for KeifeRx, and 
has received speaker fees from Eisai, Inc. Dr. Miller has no conflicts to 
declare. Dr. Morris is funded by NIH grants P30 AG066444, P01AG003991, 
P01AG026276, U19 AG032438, and U19 AG024904. Neither Dr. Morris nor his family 
owns stock or has equity interest (outside of mutual funds or other externally 
directed accounts) in any pharmaceutical or biotechnology company. Dr. Nosheny 
receives support in the form of grants to UCSF from NIH, The Alzheimer's 
Association, and Genentech, Inc. Dr. Okonkwo has no conflicts to declare. Dr. 
Perrin is supported by NIH grants R01AG068319, R01 AG053267, R01AG054567, P01 
AG003991, P30 AG066444, U19AG024904, U19 AG032438, R01 AG052550, R01 AG070883, 
R01NS097799, R01NS092865, R01AG054513, and R01 NS075321. Neither Dr. Perrin nor 
his family owns stock or has equity interest (outside of mutual funds or other 
externally directed accounts) in any pharmaceutical or biotechnology company. 
Dr. Petersen has consulted for Roche, Inc., Merck, Inc., Biogen, Inc., Eisai, 
Inc., Nestle, Inc., and Genentech, Inc. Dr. Rivera Mindt receives support from 
multiple NIH grants (R01AG065110‐01A1, R01AG066471‐01A1, 5U19AG024904, R13 
AG071313‐01, SC3GM141996) and the Genentech Health Equity Innovations 2020 Fund 
(G‐89294). She serves on the following Boards: ALL‐FTD External Advisory Board, 
Alzheimer's Association New York City, Brown University Carney Center, Harlem 
Community and Academic Partnership, South Texas Alzheimer's Disease Research 
Center (ADRC) External Advisory Board, and University of Washington ADRC 
External Advisory Board. Dr. Saykin receives support from multiple NIH grants 
(P30 AG010133, P30 AG072976, R01 AG019771, R01 AG057739, U01 AG024904, R01 
LM013463, R01 AG068193, T32 AG071444, and U01 AG068057 and U01 AG072177). He has 
also received support from Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, a subsidiary of Eli Lilly 
(in kind contribution of PET tracer precursor); Bayer Oncology (Scientific 
Advisory Board); Eisai (Scientific Advisory Board); Siemens Medical Solutions 
USA, Inc. (Dementia Advisory Board); and Springer‐Nature Publishing (Editorial 
Office Support as Editor‐in‐Chief, Brain Imaging and Behavior). Dr. Shaw 
receives support from NIH grants P30 AG072979, U19AG024904, R01MH117114; grant 
support from the Michael J Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Disease Research and 
support from Roche (IIS and in‐kind reagents and instrumentation support for CSF 
AD biomarkers); he has received honoraria from Roche, Biogen, and Fujirebio for 
participation in teaching programs and served on Advisory Boards for Roche and 
Biogen. Dr. Toga has no conflicts to declare. Dr. Tosun receives support from 
NIH grant U01AG024904 and from the Department of Defense (grant numbers 
W81XWH‐12‐2‐0012, W81XWH‐13‐1‐0259, and W81XWH‐14‐1‐0462), Dr. Veitch has no 
conflicts to declare. Dr. Weiner serves on Editorial Boards for Alzheimer's & 
Dementia, MRI and TMRI. He has served on Advisory Boards for Acumen 
Pharmaceutical, ADNI, Alzheon, Inc., Biogen, Brain Health Registry, Cerecin, 
Dolby Family Ventures, Eli Lilly, Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., National Institute 
on Aging (NIA), Nestle/Nestec, PCORI/PPRN, Roche, University of Southern 
California (USC), andNervGen. He has provided consulting to Baird Equity 
Capital, BioClinica, Cerecin, Inc., Cytox, Dolby Family Ventures, Duke 
University, Eisai, FUJIFILM‐Toyama Chemical (Japan), Garfield Weston, Genentech, 
Guidepoint Global, Indiana University, Japanese Organization for Medical Device 
Development, Inc. (JOMDD), Medscape, Nestle/Nestec, NIH, Peerview Internal 
Medicine, Roche, T3D Therapeutics, University of Southern California (USC), and 
Vida Ventures. He has acted as a speaker/lecturer to The Buck Institute for 
Research on Aging; China Association for Alzheimer's Disease (CAAD); Japan 
Society for Dementia Research; and Korean Dementia Society He holds stock 
options with Alzheon, Inc., Alzeca, and Anven. The following entities have 
provided funding for academic travel; University of Southern California (USC), 
NervGen, ASFNR, and CTAD Congress. Author disclosures are available in the 
supporting information.


24. JMA J. 2022 Jul 15;5(3):307-313. doi: 10.31662/jmaj.2022-0079. Epub 2022 Jun 17.

Molecular Pathogenesis and Disease-modifying Therapies of Alzheimer's Disease 
and Related Disorders.

Iwatsubo T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)National Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and 
Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.

The deposition of amyloid β (Aβ) peptides as senile plaques and tau as 
neurofibrillary changes causes the hallmark neuropathological lesions of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), which are implicated in its pathogenesis and deemed as 
the prime target for disease-modifying therapies (DMTs). Aβ is produced by 
sequential proteolytic cleavage by β- and γ-secretases. γ-Secretase, harboring 
presenilins (PS) as the catalytic center, forms the C-terminus of Aβ that 
determines its propensity to aggregate; missense mutations in PS genes cause 
familial AD by altering the preferred γ-secretase cleavage sites to increase the 
production of pathogenic Aβ42 species. Numerous DMTs for AD have been tested in 
clinical trials, some of which met the clinical endpoints, whereas others, 
especially those conducted in dementia stages, have failed, underscoring the 
needs for early intervention. Notably, positive outcomes of recent trials for 
anti-Aβ antibody drugs have depended largely on molecular imaging and fluid 
biomarkers, underscoring the needs of markers that surrogate the clinical and 
pathophysiological progression of AD. Longitudinal observational studies as 
represented by the AD Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) in North America, as well 
as the Japanese ADNI (J-ADNI), have contributed greatly toward the goal of very 
early treatment at the prodromal and preclinical AD stages by delineating the 
early natural course of AD and facilitating the development of biomarkers. It 
has been demonstrated that the clinical and biomarker profiles of prodromal AD 
in J-ADNI were remarkably similar to those in the North American ADNI, 
supporting the harmonization of global clinical trials. These clinical studies 
in Japan, accelerated by the development and implementation of biomarkers, will 
pave the way toward the development of AD therapies targeting its very early 
stages.

Copyright © Japan Medical Association.

DOI: 10.31662/jmaj.2022-0079
PMCID: PMC9358130
PMID: 35992282

Conflict of interest statement: None


25. J Hum Genet. 2023 Mar;68(3):231-235. doi: 10.1038/s10038-022-01047-8. Epub 2022 
Jun 10.

CDiP technology for reverse engineering of sporadic Alzheimer's disease.

Kondo T(1)(2)(3), Yada Y(1)(3), Ikeuchi T(4), Inoue H(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
Japan.
(2)Medical-risk Avoidance based on iPS Cells Team, RIKEN Center for Advanced 
Intelligence Project (AIP), Kyoto, Japan.
(3)iPSC-based Drug Discovery and Development Team, RIKEN BioResource Research 
Center (BRC), Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, Brain Research Institute, Niigata 
University, Niigata, Japan.
(5)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
Japan. haruhisa@cira.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(6)Medical-risk Avoidance based on iPS Cells Team, RIKEN Center for Advanced 
Intelligence Project (AIP), Kyoto, Japan. haruhisa@cira.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(7)iPSC-based Drug Discovery and Development Team, RIKEN BioResource Research 
Center (BRC), Kyoto, Japan. haruhisa@cira.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(8)Institute for Advancement of Clinical and Translational Science (iACT), Kyoto 
University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan. haruhisa@cira.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease that causes cognitive 
impairment for which neither treatable nor preventable approaches have been 
confirmed. Although genetic factors are considered to contribute to sporadic AD, 
for the majority of AD patients, the exact causes of AD aren't fully understood. 
For AD genetics, we developed cellular dissection of polygenicity (CDiP) 
technology to identify the smallest unit of AD, i.e., genetic factors at a 
cellular level. By CDiP, we found potential therapeutic targets, a rare variant 
for disease stratification, and polygenes to predict real-world AD by using the 
real-world data of AD cohort studies (Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative: ADNI and Japanese Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative: 
J-ADNI). In this review, we describe the components and results of CDiP in AD, 
induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) cohort, a cell genome-wide association 
study (cell GWAS), and machine learning. And finally, we discuss the future 
perspectives of CDiP technology for reverse engineering of sporadic AD toward AD 
eradication.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-022-01047-8
PMCID: PMC9968655
PMID: 35680997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


26. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Apr 7;14:840386. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.840386. 
eCollection 2022.

Prediction Models for Conversion From Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer's 
Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Chen Y(1), Qian X(2), Zhang Y(1), Su W(1), Huang Y(1), Wang X(1), Chen X(1), 
Zhao E(1), Han L(1)(3), Ma Y(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Evidence-Based Nursing, School of Nursing, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 
China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Second Hospital of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 
China.
(3)Department of Nursing, Gansu Provincial Hospital, Lanzhou, China.
(4)First School of Clinical Medicine, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a devastating 
neurodegenerative disorder with no cure, and available treatments are only able 
to postpone the progression of the disease. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is 
considered to be a transitional stage preceding AD. Therefore, prediction models 
for conversion from MCI to AD are desperately required. These will allow early 
treatment of patients with MCI before they develop AD. This study performed a 
systematic review and meta-analysis to summarize the reported risk prediction 
models and identify the most prevalent factors for conversion from MCI to AD.
METHODS: We systematically reviewed the studies from the databases of PubMed, 
CINAHL Plus, Web of Science, Embase, and Cochrane Library, which were searched 
through September 2021. Two reviewers independently identified eligible articles 
and extracted the data. We used the Critical Appraisal and Data Extraction for 
Systematic Reviews of Prediction Modeling Studies (CHARMS) checklist for the 
risk of bias assessment.
RESULTS: In total, 18 articles describing the prediction models for conversion 
from MCI to AD were identified. The dementia conversion rate of elderly patients 
with MCI ranged from 14.49 to 87%. Models in 12 studies were developed using the 
data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). C-index/area 
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of development models 
were 0.67-0.98, and the validation models were 0.62-0.96. MRI, apolipoprotein E 
genotype 4 (APOE4), older age, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score, and 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale cognitive (ADAS-cog) score were the most 
common and strongest predictors included in the models.
CONCLUSION: In this systematic review, many prediction models have been 
developed and have good predictive performance, but the lack of external 
validation of models limited the extensive application in the general 
population. In clinical practice, it is recommended that medical professionals 
adopt a comprehensive forecasting method rather than a single predictive factor 
to screen patients with a high risk of MCI. Future research should pay attention 
to the improvement, calibration, and validation of existing models while 
considering new variables, new methods, and differences in risk profiles across 
populations.

Copyright © 2022 Chen, Qian, Zhang, Su, Huang, Wang, Chen, Zhao, Han and Ma.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.840386
PMCID: PMC9049273
PMID: 35493941

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


27. Curr Genomics. 2021 Dec 30;22(5):363-372. doi: 
10.2174/1389202922666210625161602.

Quantitative Trait Loci Identification by Estimating the Genetic Model based on 
the Extremal Samples.

Yang Z(1), Yang Y(1), Xu XS(1), Yuan M(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Statistics and Finance, University of Science and Technology 
of China, Hefei230026, China; 2Genmab US, Inc, Princeton, NJ08540, USA; 3Center 
for Data Science in Health, School of Public Health Administration, Anhui 
Medical University, Hefei230032, China.

BACKGROUND: In genetic association studies with quantitative trait loci (QTL), 
the association between a candidate genetic marker and the trait of interest is 
commonly examined by the omnibus F test or by the t-test corresponding to a 
given genetic model or mode of inheritance. It is known that the t-test with a 
correct model specification is more powerful than the F test. However, since the 
underlying genetic model is rarely known in practice, the use of a 
model-specific t-test may incur substantial power loss. Robust-efficient tests, 
such as the Maximin Efficiency Robust Test (MERT) and MAX3 have been proposed in 
the literature.
METHODS: In this paper, we propose a novel two-step robust-efficient approach, 
namely, the genetic model selection (GMS) method for quantitative trait 
analysis. GMS selects a genetic model by testing Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium 
(HWD) with extremal samples of the population in the first step and then applies 
the corresponding genetic model-specific t-test in the second step.
RESULTS: Simulations show that GMS is not only more efficient than MERT and 
MAX3, but also has comparable power to the optimal t-test when the genetic model 
is known.
CONCLUSION: Application to the data from Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) cohort demonstrates that the proposed approach can identify 
meaningful biological SNPs on chromosome 19.

© 2021 Bentham Science Publishers.

DOI: 10.2174/1389202922666210625161602
PMCID: PMC8844942
PMID: 35283669


28. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2023 Jan-Feb;20(1):74-93. doi: 
10.1109/TCBB.2022.3143900. Epub 2023 Feb 3.

A Review of Fusion Methods for Omics and Imaging Data.

Huang W, Tan K, Zhang Z, Hu J, Dong S.

The development of omics data and biomedical images has greatly advanced the 
progress of precision medicine in diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis. The 
fusion of omics and imaging data, i.e., omics-imaging fusion, offers a new 
strategy for understanding complex diseases. However, due to a variety of issues 
such as the limited number of samples, high dimensionality of features, and 
heterogeneity of different data types, efficiently learning complementary or 
associated discriminative fusion information from omics and imaging data remains 
a challenge. Recently, numerous machine learning methods have been proposed to 
alleviate these problems. In this review, from the perspective of fusion levels 
and fusion methods, we first provide an overview of preprocessing and feature 
extraction methods for omics and imaging data, and comprehensively analyze and 
summarize the basic forms and variations of commonly used and newly emerging 
fusion methods, along with their advantages, disadvantages and the applicable 
scope. We then describe public datasets and compare experimental results of 
various fusion methods on the ADNI and TCGA datasets. Finally, we discuss future 
prospects and highlight remaining challenges in the field.

DOI: 10.1109/TCBB.2022.3143900
PMID: 35044920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2021 Sep 28;13(1):162. doi: 10.1186/s13195-021-00900-w.

Machine learning methods for predicting progression from mild cognitive 
impairment to Alzheimer's disease dementia: a systematic review.

Grueso S(1), Viejo-Sobera R(2).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive NeuroLab, Faculty of Health Sciences, Universitat Oberta de 
Catalunya (UOC), Rambla del Poblenou 156, 08018, Barcelona, Spain. 
sgrueso@uoc.edu.
(2)Cognitive NeuroLab, Faculty of Health Sciences, Universitat Oberta de 
Catalunya (UOC), Rambla del Poblenou 156, 08018, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: An increase in lifespan in our society is a double-edged sword that 
entails a growing number of patients with neurocognitive disorders, Alzheimer's 
disease being the most prevalent. Advances in medical imaging and computational 
power enable new methods for the early detection of neurocognitive disorders 
with the goal of preventing or reducing cognitive decline. Computer-aided image 
analysis and early detection of changes in cognition is a promising approach for 
patients with mild cognitive impairment, sometimes a prodromal stage of 
Alzheimer's disease dementia.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic review following PRISMA guidelines of studies 
where machine learning was applied to neuroimaging data in order to predict 
whether patients with mild cognitive impairment might develop Alzheimer's 
disease dementia or remain stable. After removing duplicates, we screened 452 
studies and selected 116 for qualitative analysis.
RESULTS: Most studies used magnetic resonance image (MRI) and positron emission 
tomography (PET) data but also magnetoencephalography. The datasets were mainly 
extracted from the Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative (ADNI) database 
with some exceptions. Regarding the algorithms used, the most common was support 
vector machine with a mean accuracy of 75.4%, but convolutional neural networks 
achieved a higher mean accuracy of 78.5%. Studies combining MRI and PET achieved 
overall better classification accuracy than studies that only used one 
neuroimaging technique. In general, the more complex models such as those based 
on deep learning, combined with multimodal and multidimensional data 
(neuroimaging, clinical, cognitive, genetic, and behavioral) achieved the best 
performance.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the performance of the different methods still has room 
for improvement, the results are promising and this methodology has a great 
potential as a support tool for clinicians and healthcare professionals.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-021-00900-w
PMCID: PMC8480074
PMID: 34583745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


30. Alzheimers Dement. 2022 Apr;18(4):824-857. doi: 10.1002/alz.12422. Epub 2021 Sep 
28.

Using the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative to improve early 
detection, diagnosis, and treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

Veitch DP(1)(2), Weiner MW(1)(3)(4)(5)(6), Aisen PS(7), Beckett LA(8), DeCarli 
C(9), Green RC(10), Harvey D(8), Jack CR Jr(11), Jagust W(12), Landau SM(12), 
Morris JC(13), Okonkwo O(14), Perrin RJ(13)(15)(16), Petersen RC(17), 
Rivera-Mindt M(18), Saykin AJ(19)(20), Shaw LM(21), Toga AW(22), Tosun D(3), 
Trojanowski JQ(21); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Northern California Institute 
for Research and Education (NCIRE), San Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Department of Radiology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(7)Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute, University of Southern 
California, San Diego, California, USA.
(8)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Sciences, University 
of California Davis, Davis, California, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology and Center for Neuroscience, University of California 
Davis, Davis, California, USA.
(10)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Broad Institute, Ariadne Labs, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(11)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(12)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California, USA.
(13)Knight Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA.
(14)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Disease Research Center and Department of Medicine, 
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, 
Wisconsin, USA.
(15)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(16)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA.
(17)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(18)Department of Psychology, Fordham University, New York, New York, USA.
(19)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences and Indiana Alzheimer's Disease 
Research Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, 
USA.
(20)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(21)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Center for 
Neurodegenerative Research, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(22)Laboratory of Neuroimaging, USC Stevens Institute of Neuroimaging and 
Informatics, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) has 
accumulated 15 years of clinical, neuroimaging, cognitive, biofluid biomarker 
and genetic data, and biofluid samples available to researchers, resulting in 
more than 3500 publications. This review covers studies from 2018 to 2020.
METHODS: We identified 1442 publications using ADNI data by conventional search 
methods and selected impactful studies for inclusion.
RESULTS: Disease progression studies supported pivotal roles for regional 
amyloid beta (Aβ) and tau deposition, and identified underlying genetic 
contributions to Alzheimer's disease (AD). Vascular disease, immune response, 
inflammation, resilience, and sex modulated disease course. Biologically 
coherent subgroups were identified at all clinical stages. Practical algorithms 
and methodological changes improved determination of Aβ status. Plasma Aβ, 
phosphorylated tau181, and neurofilament light were promising noninvasive 
biomarkers. Prognostic and diagnostic models were externally validated in ADNI 
but studies are limited by lack of ethnocultural cohort diversity.
DISCUSSION: ADNI has had a profound impact in improving clinical trials for AD.

© 2021 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.12422
PMCID: PMC9158456
PMID: 34581485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Veitch was supported for the present work by 
NIH grant U19‐AG024904 and has no other support or conflicts of interest to 
declare. Dr. Weiner is the principal investigator of NIH‐funded grants. Over the 
past 36 months he received funding administered through his institutions (NIH 
grants: 1RF1AG059009‐01 and 1R01AG058676‐01A1; CA Dept. of Health grant: 
19‐10616; NIH Subaward from Dr. Richard Gershon: 1U2CA060426‐01), consulting 
fees (Cerecin/Accera, Inc., BioClinica, Nestle/Nestec, Roche, Genentech, NIH, 
The Buck Institute for Research on Aging, FUJIFILM‐Toyama Chemical [Japan], 
Garfield Weston, Baird Equity Capital, University of Southern California [USC], 
Cytox, and Japanese Organization for Medical Device Development, Inc. [JOMDD], 
and T3D Therapeutics), and payment for lecturing (The Buck Institute for 
Research on Aging). He holds stock options in Anven, Alzheon, and Aleca. He 
receives other grant support for his work (NIH: 5U19AG024904‐14; 
1R01AG053798‐01A1; R01 MH098062; U24 AG057437‐01; 1U2CA060426‐01; 
1R01AG058676‐01A1; and 1RF1AG059009‐01, DOD: W81XWH‐15‐2‐0070; 
0W81XWH‐12‐2‐0012; W81XWH‐14‐1‐0462; W81XWH‐13‐1‐0259, PCORI: PPRN‐1501‐26817, 
California Dept. of Public Health: 16‐10054, U. Michigan: 18‐PAF01312, Siemens: 
444951‐54249, Biogen: 174552, Hillblom Foundation: 2015‐A‐011‐NET, Alzheimer's 
Association: BHR‐16‐459161; The State of California: 18‐109929). He also 
receives support from Johnson & Johnson, Kevin and Connie Shanahan, GE, VUmc, 
Australian Catholic University (HBI‐BHR), The Stroke Foundation, and the 
Veterans Administration. He has served on advisory boards for Eli Lilly, 
Cerecin/Accera, Roche, Alzheon, Inc., Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., Nestle/Nestec, 
PCORI/PPRN, Dolby Family Ventures, National Institute on Aging (NIA), Brain 
Health Registry, and ADNI. He has no other support or conflicts of interest to 
declare. Dr. Aisen has received support over the last 36 months from payments to 
his institution from NIA, Alzheimer's Association, Janssen, Lilly, and Eisai. He 
has served on the advisory boards of Biogen, Merck, Roche, Abbvie, Rainbow 
Medical, ImmunoBrain Checkpoint, Shionogi, and has no other support or conflicts 
of interest to declare. Dr. Beckett was supported in the current work by NIA/NIH 
U01AG024904 to her institution and received support over the last 36 months from 
payments to her institution from U01AG024904 (Dr. Weiner, UCSF/NCIRE), 
R01AG062517 (Dr. Dugger), B639943 (Dr. Coleman), and the National Institute of 
Justice 2014‐R2‐CX‐0012 (Dr. Wintemute). She has served on the external advisory 
board for Alzheimer's Disease Centers at UCSD, Washington University, University 
of Pittsburgh and Data and Safety Monitoring Boards for NIH‐funded clinical 
trial (UCSF), all paid directly to her. Her travel to the AAIC was supported by 
U01AG024904. She has no other support or conflicts of interest to declare. Dr. 
DeCarli was supported in the current work by NIH and has received support over 
the last 36 months from payments to his institution from the NIH. He served on 
an advisory board at Novartis on a safety study of heart failure treatment and 
has no other support or conflicts of interest to declare. Dr. Green was 
supported in the current work by NIH funding. Over the last 36 months, he has 
received support from multiple NIH grants to his institution, consulting fees 
(AIA, Genomic Life, Grail, Humanity, Kneed Media, Plumcare, UnitedHealth, 
Verily, VibrentHealth, and Genome Medical), and lectures in non‐Alzheimer's 
fields. He has no other support or conflicts of interest to declare. Dr. Harvey 
has no support or conflicts of interest to declare. Dr. Jack was supported in 
the current work by NIH funding. Over the last 36 months, he has received 
support from NIH grants to his institution and has served on the advisory boards 
of iDMC and Roche with no payments made. He has no other support or conflicts of 
interest to declare. Dr. Jagust has received support over the last 36 months 
from grants to his institution (NIH grants R01 AG034570 [Dr. Jagust], 
R01AG062542 [Dr. Jagust], U24 AG067418 [Dr. Jagust], P01AG019724 [Dr. Bruce 
Miller], R01 AG031164 [Dr. Matthew Walker], RF1 AG054019 [Dr. Matthew Walker], 
U01 AG024904 [Dr. Weiner], RF1 AG054106‐01A1 [Dr. Matthew Walker], 
R44AG046025‐03 [Dr. Daojing Wang], R01 AG061303 [Dr. Lexin Li], MH112775 [Dr. 
Ming Hsu], 1R01AG062689‐01 [Dr. Landau], AG062624 [Dr. José Luchsinger], and 
R01AG069090), direct consulting fees (Biogen, Bioclinica, Genentech/Roche, 
CuraSen, Grifols), and has served on the advisory board of the Alzheimer's 
Prevention Initiative. He has no other support or conflicts of interest to 
declare. Dr. Landau has received support over the last 36 months from grants 
through her institution (R01 AG062689 [Dr. Landau], U19 AG024904 [Dr. Weiner], 
R01 AG061303 [Dr. Li], R01AG062542 [Dr. Jagust], U24 AG067418 [Dr. Jagust]), an 
honorarium for speaking (4th annual Hillblom Symposium, University of CA, San 
Francisco), travel expenses and conference registration (AAIC 2017‐2019 as 
member of the Scientific Program Committee during this period), and has served 
on the advisory board of KeifeRx. She has no other support or conflicts of 
interest to declare. Dr. Morris over the past 36 months received honoraria 
(Grand Rounds lecture advisory board member) and support to attend national and 
international meetings, external advisory meetings, and board member meetings. 
He has no other support or conflicts of interest to declare. Dr. Okonkwo over 
the past 36 months received grants through his institution from the NIH and 
served in the International Neuropsychological Society. He has no other support 
or conflicts of interest to declare. Dr. Perrin over the past 36 months received 
grants through his institution (U19 AG024904, R01 NS092865, RF1 AG053550, R01 
AG054513, R01 AG054567, R01 AG052550, P01 AG00399,1 U19 AG032438, P30 AG066444, 
U19 AG032438, R01 AG068319, R01AG053267, R01 AG070883, R01 NS103276). He has no 
other support or conflicts of interest to declare. Dr. Petersen over the past 36 
months received grants through his institution (P30 AG062677, U01 AG006786); 
licenses or royalties from Oxford University Press and UpToDate; and consulting 
fees from Roche, Merck, Biogen, Genentech, and Eisai. He served on the advisory 
board of Genentech and has no other support or conflicts of interest to declare. 
Dr. Rivera‐Mindt over the past 36 months received grants through her institution 
(NIH/NIA R13 AG071313‐01 [Drs. M. Rivera Mindt, R. Turner‐II, M. Carrillo], 
Genentech Health Equity Innovations 2020 Fund G‐89294 [Drs. M. Rivera Mindt, R. 
Nosheny & C. Hill], NIH/NIA R01AG065110 ‐ 01A1 [Dr. Rivera Mindt], NIH/NIA 
5U19AG024904‐14 [Dr. Weiner], R01AG066471‐01A1 [Drs. A. Federman & J.P. 
Wisnivesky], AARGD‐16‐446038 [Dr. Rivera Mindt; PI of subcontract to Mt. Sinai: 
J. Robinson‐Papp], and NIH/NIMH U24MH100931‐03 [Dr. S. Morgello]), speaking fees 
for talks at various universities across the country (e.g., Brown, Columbia, 
University of Arizona), and travel support from NIH grants. She has served on 
the Society for Black Neuropsychology; is a Present Member, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) BOLD Public Health Center of Excellence on Dementia 
Risk Reduction Expert Panel; and Present Member, CDC/National Alzheimer's 
Project Act (NAPA) Physical Activity, Tobacco Use, and Alcohol Workgroup; and 
was paid directly for her role on the 2019 Data Safety & Monitoring Board (DSMB) 
Member Project Title: Reducing HIV Risk Behavior in Depressed and Non‐Depressed 
Older Adults with HIV; Grant #: R01AG05308101 (PI: T. Lovejoy). She is a Present 
Board Member, Alzheimer's Association NYC Chapter Board of Directors, 
President‐Elect and Past‐President (Elected Position), Hispanic 
Neuropsychological Society, on the Board of Directors, Harlem Community & 
Academic Partnership, all unpaid. She has no other support or conflicts of 
interest to declare. Dr. Saykin was supported in this work by grants from NIH 
and Department of Defense (NIH grants U01 AG024904, P30 AG010133, R01 AG019771, 
R01 LM013463, R01 LM011360 and DoD grants W81XWH‐13‐1‐0259 and 
W81XWH‐12‐2‐0012), and over the past 36 months received support from grants to 
his institution (as detailed above). He served on the Bayer Oncology Advisory 
Board and received PET tracer precursor from Avid Radiopharmaceuticals. He has 
no other support or conflicts of interest to declare. Dr. Shaw has received over 
the past 36 months grants through his institution (NIH grants U01 AG024904 
[ADNI3], UPenn ADRC NIA grant for Biomarker Core; Michael J. Fox Foundation for 
Parkinson's Research for AD biomarker studies; Roche IIS for AD biomarker 
studies), fees for the Biogen Teaching program on AD Biomarkers, and travel 
funds from NIA ADNI3 Biomarker Core. He has served on the Roche Advisory Board, 
LEADS Advisory board, and Fujirebio Advisory Board. He received in‐kind support 
from Roche (immunoassay reagents and equipment) for ADNI3. He has no other 
support or conflicts of interest to declare. Dr. Toga was supported in this work 
by grants from NIH and has received over the past 36 months grants through his 
institution from NIH and speaking fees from Biogen. He has no other support or 
conflicts of interest to declare. Dr. Tosun has received over the past 36 months 
grants through her institution (NIH U01 AG024904). She has no other support or 
conflicts of interest to declare. Dr. Trojanowski has received over the past 36 
months grants through his institution (AG10124). He has no other support or 
conflicts of interest to declare.


31. Neurosci Lett. 2021 Sep 25;762:136147. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2021.136147. Epub 
2021 Jul 29.

Strategies for multivariate analyses of imaging genetics study in Alzheimer's 
disease.

Sheng J(1), Wang L(2), Cheng H(3), Zhang Q(4), Zhou R(5), Shi Y(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, China; Key Laboratory of Intelligent Image Analysis 
for Sensory and Cognitive Health, Ministry of Industry and Information 
Technology of China, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, China. Electronic address: 
jsheng@hdu.edu.cn.
(2)School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, China; Key Laboratory of Intelligent Image Analysis 
for Sensory and Cognitive Health, Ministry of Industry and Information 
Technology of China, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, China; College of Information 
Engineering, Hangzhou Vocational & Technical College, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, 
China.
(3)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN 47405, USA.
(4)Beijing Hospital, Beijing 100730, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Intelligent Image Analysis for Sensory and Cognitive 
Health, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of China, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang 310018, China; School of Mechanical Engineering, Hangzhou Dianzi 
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, China; Mstar Technologies Inc., Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang 310018, China.
(6)School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, China; Key Laboratory of Intelligent Image Analysis 
for Sensory and Cognitive Health, Ministry of Industry and Information 
Technology of China, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, China.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an incurable neurodegenerative disease primarily 
affecting the elderly population. Early diagnosis of AD is critical for the 
management of this disease. Imaging genetics examines the influence of genetic 
variants (i.e., single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)) on brain structure and 
function and many novel approaches of imaging genetics are proposed for studying 
AD. We review and synthesize the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) genetic associations with quantitative disease endophenotypes including 
structural and functional neuroimaging, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), positron 
emission tomography (PET), and fluid biomarker assays. In this review, we survey 
recent publications using neuroimaging and genetic data of AD, with a focus on 
methods capturing multivariate effects accommodating the large number variables 
from both imaging data and genetic data. We review methods focused on bridging 
the imaging and genetic data by establishing genotype-phenotype association, 
including sparse canonical correlation analysis, parallel independent component 
analysis, sparse reduced rank regression, sparse partial least squares, 
genome-wide association study, and so on. The broad availability and wide scope 
of ADNI genetic and phenotypic data has advanced our understanding of the 
genetic basis of AD and has nominated novel targets for future pharmaceutical 
therapy and biomarker development.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2021.136147
PMID: 34332030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021 Mar 31;13:627919. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.627919. 
eCollection 2021.

Gray Matter Atrophy in Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Voxel-Based 
Meta-Analysis.

Zhang J(1)(2), Liu Y(3), Lan K(1), Huang X(3), He Y(1), Yang F(3), Li J(2), Hu 
Q(2), Xu J(2), Yu H(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)The Fourth Clinical Medical College of Guangzhou University of Chinese 
Medicine, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Institute of Biomedical and Health Engineering, Shenzhen Institutes of 
Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Department of Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Shenzhen Traditional Chinese 
Medicine Hospital, Shenzhen, China.

Background: Voxel-based morphometry (VBM) has been widely used to investigate 
structural alterations in amnesia mild cognitive impairment (aMCI). However, 
inconsistent results have hindered our understanding of the exact neuropathology 
related to aMCI. Objectives: Our aim was to systematically review the literature 
reporting VBM on aMCI to elucidate consistent gray matter alterations, their 
functional characterization, and corresponding co-activation patterns. Methods: 
The PubMed, Web of Science, and EMBASE databases were searched for VBM studies 
on aMCI published from inception up to June 2020. Peak coordinates were 
extracted from clusters that showed significant gray matter differences between 
aMCI patients and healthy controls (HC). Meta-analysis was performed using 
seed-based d mapping with the permutation of subject images (SDM-PSI), a newly 
improved meta-analytic method. Functional characterization and task-based 
co-activation patterns using the BrainMap database were performed on significant 
clusters to explore their functional roles. Finally, VBM was performed based on 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset to further 
support the findings. Results: A total of 31 studies with 681 aMCI patients and 
837 HC were included in this systematic review. The aMCI group showed 
significant gray matter atrophy in the left amygdala and right hippocampus, 
which was consistent with results from the ADNI dataset. Functional 
characterization revealed that these regions were mainly associated with 
emotion, cognition, and perception. Further, meta-regression analysis 
demonstrated that gray matter atrophy in the left inferior frontal gyrus and the 
left angular gyrus was significantly associated with cognitive impairment in the 
aMCI group. Conclusions: The findings of gray matter atrophy in the left 
amygdala and right hippocampus are highly consistent and robust, and not only 
offer a better understanding of the underlying neuropathology but also provide 
accurate potential biomarkers for aMCI.

Copyright © 2021 Zhang, Liu, Lan, Huang, He, Yang, Li, Hu, Xu and Yu.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.627919
PMCID: PMC8044397
PMID: 33867968

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


33. Neuroinformatics. 2021 Jan;19(1):57-78. doi: 10.1007/s12021-020-09469-5.

Reproducible Evaluation of Diffusion MRI Features for Automatic Classification 
of Patients with Alzheimer's Disease.

Wen J(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Samper-González J(6)(7)(8)(9)(10), Bottani 
S(6)(7)(8)(9)(10), Routier A(6)(7)(8)(9)(10)(11), Burgos N(6)(7)(8)(9)(10), 
Jacquemont T(6)(7)(8)(9)(10), Fontanella S(6)(7)(8)(9)(10), Durrleman 
S(6)(7)(8)(9)(10), Epelbaum S(6)(7)(8)(9)(10)(12), Bertrand 
A(6)(7)(8)(9)(10)(13), Colliot O(14)(15)(16)(17)(18)(19); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, ICM, F-75013, Paris, France. 
junhao.wen89@gmail.com.
(2)Inserm, U 1127, F-75013, Paris, France. junhao.wen89@gmail.com.
(3)CNRS, UMR 7225, F-75013, Paris, France. junhao.wen89@gmail.com.
(4)Sorbonne Université, F-75013, Paris, France. junhao.wen89@gmail.com.
(5)Inria, Aramis project-team, F-75013, Paris, France. junhao.wen89@gmail.com.
(6)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, ICM, F-75013, Paris, France.
(7)Inserm, U 1127, F-75013, Paris, France.
(8)CNRS, UMR 7225, F-75013, Paris, France.
(9)Sorbonne Université, F-75013, Paris, France.
(10)Inria, Aramis project-team, F-75013, Paris, France.
(11)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, ICM, FrontLab, F-75013, Paris, 
France.
(12)Department of Neurology, AP-HP, Hôpital de la Pitié Salpêtrière, Institute 
of Memory and Alzheimer's Disease (IM2A), Centre of excellence of 
neurodegenerative disease (CoEN), F-75013, Paris, France.
(13)Department of Radiology, AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, F-75013, Paris, 
France.
(14)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, ICM, F-75013, Paris, France. 
olivier.colliot@upmc.fr.
(15)Inserm, U 1127, F-75013, Paris, France. olivier.colliot@upmc.fr.
(16)CNRS, UMR 7225, F-75013, Paris, France. olivier.colliot@upmc.fr.
(17)Sorbonne Université, F-75013, Paris, France. olivier.colliot@upmc.fr.
(18)Inria, Aramis project-team, F-75013, Paris, France. olivier.colliot@upmc.fr.
(19)Departments of Neurology and Neuroradiology AP-HP, Hôpital de la Pitié 
Salpêtrière, F-75013, Paris, France. olivier.colliot@upmc.fr.

Diffusion MRI is the modality of choice to study alterations of white matter. In 
past years, various works have used diffusion MRI for automatic classification 
of Alzheimer's disease. However, classification performance obtained with 
different approaches is difficult to compare because of variations in components 
such as input data, participant selection, image preprocessing, feature 
extraction, feature rescaling (FR), feature selection (FS) and cross-validation 
(CV) procedures. Moreover, these studies are also difficult to reproduce because 
these different components are not readily available. In a previous work 
(Samper-González et al. 2018), we propose an open-source framework for the 
reproducible evaluation of AD classification from T1-weighted (T1w) MRI and PET 
data. In the present paper, we first extend this framework to diffusion MRI 
data. Specifically, we add: conversion of diffusion MRI ADNI data into the BIDS 
standard and pipelines for diffusion MRI preprocessing and feature extraction. 
We then apply the framework to compare different components. First, FS has a 
positive impact on classification results: highest balanced accuracy (BA) 
improved from 0.76 to 0.82 for task CN vs AD. Secondly, voxel-wise features 
generally gives better performance than regional features. Fractional anisotropy 
(FA) and mean diffusivity (MD) provided comparable results for voxel-wise 
features. Moreover, we observe that the poor performance obtained in tasks 
involving MCI were potentially caused by the small data samples, rather than by 
the data imbalance. Furthermore, no extensive classification difference exists 
for different degree of smoothing and registration methods. Besides, we 
demonstrate that using non-nested validation of FS leads to unreliable and 
over-optimistic results: 5% up to 40% relative increase in BA. Lastly, with 
proper FR and FS, the performance of diffusion MRI features is comparable to 
that of T1w MRI. All the code of the framework and the experiments are publicly 
available: general-purpose tools have been integrated into the Clinica software 
package ( www.clinica.run ) and the paper-specific code is available at: 
https://github.com/aramis-lab/AD-ML .

DOI: 10.1007/s12021-020-09469-5
PMID: 32524428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Med Image Anal. 2020 Jul;63:101694. doi: 10.1016/j.media.2020.101694. Epub 2020 
May 1.

Convolutional neural networks for classification of Alzheimer's disease: 
Overview and reproducible evaluation.

Wen J(1), Thibeau-Sutre E(1), Diaz-Melo M(2), Samper-González J(2), Routier 
A(2), Bottani S(2), Dormont D(3), Durrleman S(2), Burgos N(1), Colliot O(4); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; Australian Imaging Biomarkers and 
Lifestyle flagship study of ageing.

Author information:
(1)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelleépinière, ICM, Paris F-75013, France; 
SorbonneUniversité, ParisF-75013,France; Inserm, U 1127, Paris F-75013, France; 
CNRS, UMR 7225, Paris F-75013, France; Inria, Aramis project-team, Paris 
F-75013, France.
(2)Inria, Aramis project-team, Paris F-75013, France; Institut du Cerveau et de 
la Moelleépinière, ICM, Paris F-75013, France; SorbonneUniversité, 
ParisF-75013,France; Inserm, U 1127, Paris F-75013, France; CNRS, UMR 7225, 
Paris F-75013, France.
(3)Inria, Aramis project-team, Paris F-75013, France; Institut du Cerveau et de 
la Moelleépinière, ICM, Paris F-75013, France; SorbonneUniversité, 
ParisF-75013,France; Inserm, U 1127, Paris F-75013, France; CNRS, UMR 7225, 
Paris F-75013, France; Department of Neuroradiology, AP-HP, Hôpital de la 
PitiéSalpêtrière, Paris F-75013, France.
(4)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelleépinière, ICM, Paris F-75013, France; 
SorbonneUniversité, ParisF-75013,France; Inserm, U 1127, Paris F-75013, France; 
CNRS, UMR 7225, Paris F-75013, France; Inria, Aramis project-team, Paris 
F-75013, France; Department of Neuroradiology, AP-HP, Hôpital de la 
PitiéSalpêtrière, Paris F-75013, France; Department of Neurology, AP-HP, Hôpital 
de la PitiéSalpêtrière, Paris F-75013, France. Electronic address: 
olivier.colliot@upmc.fr.

Numerous machine learning (ML) approaches have been proposed for automatic 
classification of Alzheimer's disease (AD) from brain imaging data. In 
particular, over 30 papers have proposed to use convolutional neural networks 
(CNN) for AD classification from anatomical MRI. However, the classification 
performance is difficult to compare across studies due to variations in 
components such as participant selection, image preprocessing or validation 
procedure. Moreover, these studies are hardly reproducible because their 
frameworks are not publicly accessible and because implementation details are 
lacking. Lastly, some of these papers may report a biased performance due to 
inadequate or unclear validation or model selection procedures. In the present 
work, we aim to address these limitations through three main contributions. 
First, we performed a systematic literature review. We identified four main 
types of approaches: i) 2D slice-level, ii) 3D patch-level, iii) ROI-based and 
iv) 3D subject-level CNN. Moreover, we found that more than half of the surveyed 
papers may have suffered from data leakage and thus reported biased performance. 
Our second contribution is the extension of our open-source framework for 
classification of AD using CNN and T1-weighted MRI. The framework comprises 
previously developed tools to automatically convert ADNI, AIBL and OASIS data 
into the BIDS standard, and a modular set of image preprocessing procedures, 
classification architectures and evaluation procedures dedicated to deep 
learning. Finally, we used this framework to rigorously compare different CNN 
architectures. The data was split into training/validation/test sets at the very 
beginning and only the training/validation sets were used for model selection. 
To avoid any overfitting, the test sets were left untouched until the end of the 
peer-review process. Overall, the different 3D approaches (3D-subject, 3D-ROI, 
3D-patch) achieved similar performances while that of the 2D slice approach was 
lower. Of note, the different CNN approaches did not perform better than a SVM 
with voxel-based features. The different approaches generalized well to similar 
populations but not to datasets with different inclusion criteria or 
demographical characteristics. All the code of the framework and the experiments 
is publicly available: general-purpose tools have been integrated into the 
Clinica software (www.clinica.run) and the paper-specific code is available at: 
https://github.com/aramis-lab/AD-DL.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.media.2020.101694
PMID: 32417716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest OC reports 
having received speaker fees from Roche (2015), Lundbeck (2012) and Guerbet 
(2010), having received consulting fees from AskBio (2020), having received fees 
for writing a lay audience short paper from Expression Santé (2019), having 
received speaker fees for a lay audience presentation from Palais de la 
Découverte (2017) and that his laboratory has received grants (paid to the 
institution) from EISAI (2007-2011), Air Liquide Medical Systems (2011-2016), 
Qynapse (2017-present) and my Brain Technologies (2016-present). His spouse is 
an employee at my Brain Technologies (2015-).


35. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;75(4):1105-1134. doi: 10.3233/JAD-191281.

Evolution of the Research Literature and the Scientific Community of Alzheimer's 
Disease from 1983-2017: A 35-Year Survey.

Robert C(1)(2), Wilson CS(3), Lipton RB(4), Arreto CD(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
(2)Gliaxone, Saint Germain Sous Doue, France.
(3)Formerly at: School of Information Systems, Technology and Management, 
University of New South Wales, UNSW Sydney, Australia.
(4)Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(5)Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Chirurgie Dentaire, Hôpital 
Bretonneau, HUPNVS, AP-HP, Paris, France.

This study surveys the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD) in the research 
literature, the scientific community, and the journals containing AD papers over 
a 35-year period. Research papers on AD published from 1983 to 2017 in journals 
indexed in the Web of Science were analyzed in seven five-year periods. The 
number of AD papers increased from 1,095 in 1983-1987 to 50,532 by 2013-2017 and 
in the same time period, the number of participating countries went from 27 to 
152. The US was the most prolific country throughout, followed by several 
European countries, Canada, Australia, and Japan. Asian countries have emerged 
and by 2013-2017, China surpassed all but the US in productivity. Countries in 
Latin America and Africa have also contributed to AD research. Additionally, 
several new non-governmental institutions (e.g., ADNI, ADI) have emerged and now 
play a key role in the fight against AD. Likewise the AD scientific publishing 
universe evolved in various aspects: an increase in number of journals 
containing AD papers (227 journals in 1983-1987 to 3,257 in 2013-2017); 
appearance of several AD-focused journals, e.g., Alzheimer's & Dementia, Journal 
of Alzheimer's Disease; and the development of special issues dedicated to AD. 
Our paper complements the numerous extant papers on theoretical and clinical 
aspects of AD and provides a description of the research landscape of the 
countries and journals contributing papers related to AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-191281
PMID: 32390624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Med Image Anal. 2020 Jul;63:101698. doi: 10.1016/j.media.2020.101698. Epub 2020 
Apr 18.

Multi-atlas image registration of clinical data with automated quality 
assessment using ventricle segmentation.

Dubost F(1), Bruijne M(2), Nardin M(3), Dalca AV(4), Donahue KL(3), Giese AK(3), 
Etherton MR(3), Wu O(5), Groot M(6), Niessen W(7), Vernooij M(8), Rost NS(3), 
Schirmer MD(9).

Author information:
(1)J. Philip Kistler Stroke Research Center, Department of Neurology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA; Biomedical 
Imaging Group Rotterdam, Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Erasmus 
MC - University Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
floriandubost1@gmail.com.
(2)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Department of Radiology and Nuclear 
Medicine, Erasmus MC - University Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands; 
Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)J. Philip Kistler Stroke Research Center, Department of Neurology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA.
(4)Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, USA.
(5)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA.
(6)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Department of Radiology and Nuclear 
Medicine, Erasmus MC - University Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands; 
Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC - University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(7)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Department of Radiology and Nuclear 
Medicine, Erasmus MC - University Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands; 
Department of Imaging Physics, Faculty of Applied Science, TU Delft, Delft, The 
Netherlands.
(8)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Erasmus MC - University Medical 
Center Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC - 
University Medical Center Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(9)J. Philip Kistler Stroke Research Center, Department of Neurology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA; Computer 
Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, USA; Department of Population Health Sciences, German Centre for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Germany. Electronic address: 
mschirmer1@mgh.harvard.edu.

Registration is a core component of many imaging pipelines. In case of clinical 
scans, with lower resolution and sometimes substantial motion artifacts, 
registration can produce poor results. Visual assessment of registration quality 
in large clinical datasets is inefficient. In this work, we propose to 
automatically assess the quality of registration to an atlas in clinical FLAIR 
MRI scans of the brain. The method consists of automatically segmenting the 
ventricles of a given scan using a neural network, and comparing the 
segmentation to the atlas ventricles propagated to image space. We used the 
proposed method to improve clinical image registration to a general atlas by 
computing multiple registrations - one directly to the general atlas and others 
via different age-specific atlases - and then selecting the registration that 
yielded the highest ventricle overlap. Finally, as an example application of the 
complete pipeline, a voxelwise map of white matter hyperintensity burden was 
computed using only the scans with registration quality above a predefined 
threshold. Methods were evaluated in a single-site dataset of more than 1000 
scans, as well as a multi-center dataset comprising 142 clinical scans from 12 
sites. The automated ventricle segmentation reached a Dice coefficient with 
manual annotations of 0.89 in the single-site dataset, and 0.83 in the 
multi-center dataset. Registration via age-specific atlases could improve 
ventricle overlap compared to a direct registration to the general atlas (Dice 
similarity coefficient increase up to 0.15). Experiments also showed that 
selecting scans with the registration quality assessment method could improve 
the quality of average maps of white matter hyperintensity burden, instead of 
using all scans for the computation of the white matter hyperintensity map. In 
this work, we demonstrated the utility of an automated tool for assessing image 
registration quality in clinical scans. This image quality assessment step could 
ultimately assist in the translation of automated neuroimaging pipelines to the 
clinic.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.media.2020.101698
PMCID: PMC7275913
PMID: 32339896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Hum Brain Mapp. 2020 May;41(7):1859-1874. doi: 10.1002/hbm.24917. Epub 2020 Jan 
10.

Tractostorm: The what, why, and how of tractography dissection reproducibility.

Rheault F(1), De Benedictis A(2), Daducci A(3), Maffei C(4), Tax CMW(5), 
Romascano D(6), Caverzasi E(7), Morency FC(8), Corrivetti F(9), Pestilli F(10), 
Girard G(6), Theaud G(1), Zemmoura I(11), Hau J(12), Glavin K(13), Jordan KM(7), 
Pomiecko K(13), Chamberland M(5), Barakovic M(6), Goyette N(8), Poulin P(1), 
Chenot Q(14), Panesar SS(15), Sarubbo S(16), Petit L(17), Descoteaux M(1).

Author information:
(1)Sherbrooke Connectivity Imaging Laboratory (SCIL), Université de Sherbrooke, 
Sherbrooke, Canada.
(2)Neurosurgery Unit, Department of Neuroscience and Neurorehabilitation, 
Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(3)Computer Science Department, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(4)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(5)Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of 
Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(6)Signal Processing Lab (LTS5), École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA.
(8)Imeka Solutions, Sherbrooke, Canada.
(9)Départment de neurochirurgie, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France.
(10)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN.
(11)UMR 1253, iBrain, Université de Tours, Inserm, Tours, France.
(12)Brain Development Imaging Laboratories, Department of Psychology, San Diego 
State University, San Diego, CA, USA.
(13)Learning Research & Development Center (LRDC), University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(14)ISAE-SUPAERO, Toulouse, France.
(15)Department of Neurosurgery, Stanford University, Standford, CA.
(16)Division of Neurosurgery, Emergency Department, "S. Chiara" Hospital, 
Azienda Provinciale per i Servizi Sanitari (APSS), Trento, Italy.
(17)Groupe d'Imagerie Neurofonctionnelle, Institut des Maladies 
Neurodégénératives - UMR 5293, CNRS, CEA University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, 
France.

Investigative studies of white matter (WM) brain structures using diffusion MRI 
(dMRI) tractography frequently require manual WM bundle segmentation, often 
called "virtual dissection." Human errors and personal decisions make these 
manual segmentations hard to reproduce, which have not yet been quantified by 
the dMRI community. It is our opinion that if the field of dMRI tractography 
wants to be taken seriously as a widespread clinical tool, it is imperative to 
harmonize WM bundle segmentations and develop protocols aimed to be used in 
clinical settings. The EADC-ADNI Harmonized Hippocampal Protocol achieved such 
standardization through a series of steps that must be reproduced for every WM 
bundle. This article is an observation of the problematic. A specific bundle 
segmentation protocol was used in order to provide a real-life example, but the 
contribution of this article is to discuss the need for reproducibility and 
standardized protocol, as for any measurement tool. This study required the 
participation of 11 experts and 13 nonexperts in neuroanatomy and "virtual 
dissection" across various laboratories and hospitals. Intra-rater agreement 
(Dice score) was approximately 0.77, while inter-rater was approximately 0.65. 
The protocol provided to participants was not necessarily optimal, but its 
design mimics, in essence, what will be required in future protocols. Reporting 
tractometry results such as average fractional anisotropy, volume or streamline 
count of a particular bundle without a sufficient reproducibility score could 
make the analysis and interpretations more difficult. Coordinated efforts by the 
diffusion MRI tractography community are needed to quantify and account for 
reproducibility of WM bundle extraction protocols in this era of open and 
collaborative science.

© 2020 The Authors. Human Brain Mapping published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.24917
PMCID: PMC7267902
PMID: 31925871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Handb Clin Neurol. 2019;167:575-584. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-804766-8.00032-7.

The evolution of geriatric neurology.

DeKosky ST(1), Asthana S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and McKnight Brain Institute, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL, United States. Electronic address: dekosky@ufl.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine and Wisconsin Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, 
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, United States; Geriatric Research, 
Education and Clinical Center, William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital, 
Madison, WI, United States. Electronic address: sa@medicine.wisc.edu.

The founders of neurology in the late 19th century and early 20th century laid 
the foundation for modern geriatric neurology by detailed observations, in their 
patients, of the clinical expressions of aging of the nervous system. Further 
advances in clinical manifestations of aging and more detailed examination of 
disease states in the elderly accelerated in the last quarter of the 20th 
century. Basic, translational, and clinical research support of geriatric 
neurology studies expanded and advanced during this period and into the 21st 
century. The size and sophistication of this movement was stimulated by a number 
of factors: the successful development of geriatrics as a specialty in primary 
care, internal medicine, and psychiatry; the projected growth of the geriatric 
population; and the projections of the number of people with Alzheimer's 
disease. However, there were and continue to be inadequate numbers of trained 
geriatric neurologists available to care for the "silver tsunami" of elderly 
patients with age-related diseases that will present in the next 3 decades. The 
combination of massive investment in dementia/Alzheimer's research in the past 
decade, widespread awareness among researchers and trainees of the opportunities 
to do research in age-related diseases, and the need for further knowledge of 
neurodegenerative diseases led to a broad expansion of research efforts. 
Longitudinal clinical studies of the elderly and the advent of sophisticated 
neuroimaging, genetics, and laboratory techniques are advancing the field. The 
initiation of therapeutic interventions has led to cautious optimism about the 
ability to ameliorate suffering in these patients and diminish the burdens of 
central nervous system aging.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-804766-8.00032-7
PMID: 31753157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Alzheimers Dement. 2019 Oct;15(10):1348-1356. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2019.07.010. 
Epub 2019 Sep 26.

Perspective: Clinical relevance of the dichotomous classification of Alzheimer's 
disease biomarkers: Should there be a "gray zone"?

McRae-McKee K(1), Udeh-Momoh CT(2), Price G(2), Bajaj S(1), de Jager CA(2), 
Scott D(3), Hadjichrysanthou C(1), McNaughton E(1), Bracoud L(4), Ahmadi-Abhari 
S(2), de Wolf F(1), Anderson RM(1), Middleton LT(5); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, School of Public Health, 
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Ageing Epidemiology (AGE) Research Unit, School of Public Health, Imperial 
College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Bioclinica, Inc., Newark, CA, USA.
(4)Bioclinica, Inc., Lyon, France.
(5)Ageing Epidemiology (AGE) Research Unit, School of Public Health, Imperial 
College London, London, United Kingdom; Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, 
London, United Kingdom. Electronic address: l.middleton@imperial.ac.uk.

The 2018 National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA) 
research framework recently redefined Alzheimer's disease (AD) as a biological 
construct, based on in vivo biomarkers reflecting key neuropathologic features. 
Combinations of normal/abnormal levels of three biomarker categories, based on 
single thresholds, form the AD signature profile that defines the biological 
disease state as a continuum, independent of clinical symptomatology. While 
single thresholds may be useful in defining the biological signature profile, we 
provide evidence that their use in studies with cognitive outcomes merits 
further consideration. Using data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative with a focus on cortical amyloid binding, we discuss the limitations 
of applying the biological definition of disease status as a tool to define the 
increased likelihood of the onset of the Alzheimer's clinical syndrome and the 
effects that this may have on trial study design. We also suggest potential 
research objectives going forward and what the related data requirements would 
be.

Copyright © 2019 the Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2019.07.010
PMID: 31564609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Brain Nerve. 2019 Jul;71(7):733-748. doi: 10.11477/mf.1416201345.

[Artificial Intelligence for Diagnostic Support of Neuroimage].

[Article in Japanese]

Shiino A(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neuroscience Research Center, Department of Biomedical MR Science, 
Shiga University of Medical Science.

Artificial intelligence (AI) shows promises in terms of diagnostic support on 
neuroimaging. We developed a software that predicts Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
using support vector machines (SVM) through three-dimensional brain MR images. 
Here, we will explain the general idea of voxel-based morphometry and SVM. We 
used the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database for SVM 
training and tested it on the Australian Imaging Biomarkers and Lifestyle Study 
of Ageing (AIBL) and the Japanese ADNI database. AI shows higher accuracy for 
predicting AD than a method of conventional statistical analysis, indicating 
potential clinical use for diagnostic support.

DOI: 10.11477/mf.1416201345
PMID: 31289247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Jpn J Radiol. 2019 Jan;37(1):34-72. doi: 10.1007/s11604-018-0794-4. Epub 2018 
Nov 29.

Machine learning studies on major brain diseases: 5-year trends of 2014-2018.

Sakai K(1), Yamada K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto 
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kajii-cho, Kawaramachi Hirokoji Agaru, 
Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto, Kyoto, 602-8566, Japan. sakai3@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Radiology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto 
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kajii-cho, Kawaramachi Hirokoji Agaru, 
Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto, Kyoto, 602-8566, Japan.

In the recent 5 years (2014-2018), there has been growing interest in the use of 
machine learning (ML) techniques to explore image diagnosis and prognosis of 
therapeutic lesion changes within the area of neuroradiology. However, to date, 
the majority of research trend and current status have not been clearly 
illuminated in the neuroradiology field. More than 1000 papers have been 
published during the past 5 years on subject classification and prediction 
focused on multiple brain disorders. We provide a survey of 209 papers in this 
field with a focus on top ten active areas of research; i.e., Alzheimer's 
disease/mild cognitive impairment, brain tumor; schizophrenia, depressive 
disorders, Parkinson's disease, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, autism 
spectrum disease, epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, stroke, and traumatic brain 
injury. Detailed information of these studies, such as ML methods, sample size, 
type of inputted features and reported accuracy, are summarized. This paper 
reviews the evidences, current limitations and status of studies using ML to 
assess brain disorders in neuroimaging data. The main bottleneck of this 
research field is still the limited sample size, which could be potentially 
addressed by modern data sharing models, such as ADNI.

DOI: 10.1007/s11604-018-0794-4
PMID: 30498877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Alzheimers Dement. 2019 Jan;15(1):106-152. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2018.08.005. Epub 
2018 Oct 13.

Understanding disease progression and improving Alzheimer's disease clinical 
trials: Recent highlights from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Veitch DP(1), Weiner MW(2), Aisen PS(3), Beckett LA(4), Cairns NJ(5), Green 
RC(6), Harvey D(4), Jack CR Jr(7), Jagust W(8), Morris JC(9), Petersen RC(10), 
Saykin AJ(11), Shaw LM(12), Toga AW(13), Trojanowski JQ(14); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA; Northern California 
Institute for Research and Education (NCIRE), Department of Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Radiology, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Psychiatry, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Neurology, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
michael.weiner@ucsf.edu.
(3)Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute, University of Southern 
California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Sciences, University 
of California, Davis, CA, USA.
(5)Knight Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA; Department of Neurology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA.
(6)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(8)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(9)Knight Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA.
(10)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(11)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(12)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(13)Laboratory of Neuroimaging, Institute of Neuroimaging and Informatics, Keck 
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(14)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Institute on Aging, 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; 
Alzheimer's Disease Core Center, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Udall Parkinson's Research Center, Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The overall goal of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) is to validate biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
clinical trials. ADNI is a multisite, longitudinal, observational study that has 
collected many biomarkers since 2004. Recent publications highlight the 
multifactorial nature of late-onset AD. We discuss selected topics that provide 
insights into AD progression and outline how this knowledge may improve clinical 
trials.
METHODS: We used standard methods to identify nearly 600 publications using ADNI 
data from 2016 and 2017 (listed in Supplementary Material and searchable at 
http://adni.loni.usc.edu/news-publications/publications/).
RESULTS: (1) Data-driven AD progression models supported multifactorial 
interactions rather than a linear cascade of events. (2) β-Amyloid (Aβ) 
deposition occurred concurrently with functional connectivity changes within the 
default mode network in preclinical subjects and was followed by specific and 
progressive disconnection of functional and anatomical networks. (3) Changes in 
functional connectivity, volumetric measures, regional hypometabolism, and 
cognition were detectable at subthreshold levels of Aβ deposition. 4. Tau 
positron emission tomography imaging studies detailed a specific temporal and 
spatial pattern of tau pathology dependent on prior Aβ deposition, and related 
to subsequent cognitive decline. 5. Clustering studies using a wide range of 
modalities consistently identified a "typical AD" subgroup and a second subgroup 
characterized by executive impairment and widespread cortical atrophy in 
preclinical and prodromal subjects. 6. Vascular pathology burden may act through 
both Aβ dependent and independent mechanisms to exacerbate AD progression. 7. 
The APOE ε4 allele interacted with cerebrovascular disease to impede Aβ 
clearance mechanisms. 8. Genetic approaches identified novel genetic risk 
factors involving a wide range of processes, and demonstrated shared genetic 
risk for AD and vascular disorders, as well as the temporal and regional 
pathological associations of established AD risk alleles. 9. Knowledge of early 
pathological changes guided the development of novel prognostic biomarkers for 
preclinical subjects. 10. Placebo populations of randomized controlled clinical 
trials had highly variable trajectories of cognitive change, underscoring the 
importance of subject selection and monitoring. 11. Selection criteria based on 
Aβ positivity, hippocampal volume, baseline cognitive/functional measures, and 
APOE ε4 status in combination with improved cognitive outcome measures were 
projected to decrease clinical trial duration and cost. 12. Multiple concurrent 
therapies targeting vascular health and other AD pathology in addition to Aβ may 
be more effective than single therapies.
DISCUSSION: ADNI publications from 2016 and 2017 supported the idea of AD as a 
multifactorial disease and provided insights into the complexities of AD disease 
progression. These findings guided the development of novel biomarkers and 
suggested that subject selection on the basis of multiple factors may lower AD 
clinical trial costs and duration. The use of multiple concurrent therapies in 
these trials may prove more effective in reversing AD disease progression.

Copyright © 2018 the Alzheimer's Association. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2018.08.005
PMID: 30321505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Neural Regen Res. 2018 Jun;13(6):962-970. doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.233433.

How random is the random forest? Random forest algorithm on the service of 
structural imaging biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease: from Alzheimer's disease 
neuroimaging initiative (ADNI) database.

Dimitriadis SI(1), Liparas D(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, School of 
Medicine, Cardiff University; Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre, 
School of Psychology; School of Psychology; Neuroinformatics Group, Cardiff 
University Brain Research Imaging Centre, School of Psychology; Neuroscience and 
Mental Health Research Institute; MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and 
Genomics, School of Medicine, Cardiff, UK.
(2)High Performance Computing Center Stuttgart (HLRS), University of Stuttgart, 
Stuttgart, Germany; Department of Informatics, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.

Neuroinformatics is a fascinating research field that applies computational 
models and analytical tools to high dimensional experimental neuroscience data 
for a better understanding of how the brain functions or dysfunctions in brain 
diseases. Neuroinformaticians work in the intersection of neuroscience and 
informatics supporting the integration of various sub-disciplines (behavioural 
neuroscience, genetics, cognitive psychology, etc.) working on brain research. 
Neuroinformaticians are the pathway of information exchange between 
informaticians and clinicians for a better understanding of the outcome of 
computational models and the clinical interpretation of the analysis. Machine 
learning is one of the most significant computational developments in the last 
decade giving tools to neuroinformaticians and finally to radiologists and 
clinicians for an automatic and early diagnosis-prognosis of a brain disease. 
Random forest (RF) algorithm has been successfully applied to high-dimensional 
neuroimaging data for feature reduction and also has been applied to classify 
the clinical label of a subject using single or multi-modal neuroimaging 
datasets. Our aim was to review the studies where RF was applied to correctly 
predict the Alzheimer's disease (AD), the conversion from mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) and its robustness to overfitting, outliers and handling of 
non-linear data. Finally, we described our RF-based model that gave us the 1st 
position in an international challenge for automated prediction of MCI from MRI 
data.

DOI: 10.4103/1673-5374.233433
PMCID: PMC6022472
PMID: 29926817

Conflict of interest statement: None declared


44. Int J Med Inform. 2017 Oct;106:48-56. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2017.07.002. Epub 
2017 Jul 24.

Advancing Alzheimer's research: A review of big data promises.

Zhang R(1), Simon G(2), Yu F(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Health Informatics and College of Pharmacy, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States. Electronic address: zhan1386@umn.edu.
(2)Institute for Health Informatics and Department of Medicine, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States. Electronic address: simo0342@umn.edu.
(3)School of Nursing, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States. 
Electronic address: yuxxx244@umn.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To review the current state of science using big data to advance 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) research and practice. In particular, we analyzed the 
types of research foci addressed, corresponding methods employed and study 
findings reported using big data in AD.
METHOD: Systematic review was conducted for articles published in PubMed from 
January 1, 2010 through December 31, 2015. Keywords with AD and big data 
analytics were used for literature retrieval. Articles were reviewed and 
included if they met the eligibility criteria.
RESULTS: Thirty-eight articles were included in this review. They can be 
categorized into seven research foci: diagnosing AD or mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) (n=10), predicting MCI to AD conversion (n=13), stratifying risks for AD 
(n=5), mining the literature for knowledge discovery (n=4), predicting AD 
progression (n=2), describing clinical care for persons with AD (n=3), and 
understanding the relationship between cognition and AD (n=3). The most commonly 
used datasets are AD Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) (n=16), electronic health 
records (EHR) (n=11), MEDLINE (n=3), and other research datasets (n=8). Logistic 
regression (n=9) and support vector machine (n=8) are the most used methods for 
data analysis.
CONCLUSION: Big data are increasingly used to address AD-related research 
questions. While existing research datasets are frequently used, other datasets 
such as EHR data provide a unique, yet under-utilized opportunity for advancing 
AD research.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2017.07.002
PMCID: PMC5590222
PMID: 28870383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.


45. Brain Nerve. 2017 Jul;69(7):856-861. doi: 10.11477/mf.1416200831.

[Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute].

[Article in Japanese]

Shimada H(1), Kato Y, Fujii H, Mori H.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Center for Dementia, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
City University.

The Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute (ATRI) was established in 2015 
after ATRI director, Paul Aisen, and his fellow experts in therapeutic 
interventions for Alzheimer's disease (AD) moved from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Cooperative Study (ADCS) at the University of California to the Keck School of 
Medicine of the University of Southern California. The National Institute on 
Aging (NIA) decided to commit $14 million to the ATRI via an Alzheimer's 
Clinical Trials Consortium (ACTC). The ATRI supports various studies such as the 
Anti-Amyloid Treatment in Asymptomatic Alzheimer's study ("A4 study"), 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 3 (ADNI3), Longitudinal Evaluation 
of Amyloid Risk and Neurodegeneration (LEARN), and The Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative-Depression Project (ADNI-D). The ATRI will share all 
relevant data and materials with the academic community, corporations, and 
government organizations. The ATRI is overseen by a Data and Safety Monitoring 
Board (DSMB), which comprises of leading experts in the field of Alzheimer's 
research and acts independently. The ATRI is slated to play a central role in 
clinical dementia research in the US in near future.

DOI: 10.11477/mf.1416200831
PMID: 28740001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2017 Nov 15;109S:S65-S71. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2017.06.035. Epub 
2017 Jul 4.

Open innovation: Towards sharing of data, models and workflows.

Conrado DJ(1), Karlsson MO(2), Romero K(1), Sarr C(3), Wilkins JJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Quantitative Medicine, Critical Path Institute, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(2)Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. Electronic address: 
mats.karlsson@farmbio.uu.se.
(3)Pharmetheus, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Occams, Amstelveen, Netherlands.

Sharing of resources across organisations to support open innovation is an old 
idea, but which is being taken up by the scientific community at increasing 
speed, concerning public sharing in particular. The ability to address new 
questions or provide more precise answers to old questions through merged 
information is among the attractive features of sharing. Increased efficiency 
through reuse, and increased reliability of scientific findings through enhanced 
transparency, are expected outcomes from sharing. In the field of 
pharmacometrics, efforts to publicly share data, models and workflow have 
recently started. Sharing of individual-level longitudinal data for modelling 
requires solving legal, ethical and proprietary issues similar to many other 
fields, but there are also pharmacometric-specific aspects regarding data 
formats, exchange standards, and database properties. Several organisations 
(CDISC, C-Path, IMI, ISoP) are working to solve these issues and propose 
standards. There are also a number of initiatives aimed at collecting 
disease-specific databases - Alzheimer's Disease (ADNI, CAMD), malaria (WWARN), 
oncology (PDS), Parkinson's Disease (PPMI), tuberculosis (CPTR, TB-PACTS, 
ReSeqTB) - suitable for drug-disease modelling. Organized sharing of 
pharmacometric executable model code and associated information has in the past 
been sparse, but a model repository (DDMoRe Model Repository) intended for the 
purpose has recently been launched. In addition several other services can 
facilitate model sharing more generally. Pharmacometric workflows have matured 
over the last decades and initiatives to more fully capture those applied to 
analyses are ongoing. In order to maximize both the impact of pharmacometrics 
and the knowledge extracted from clinical data, the scientific community needs 
to take ownership of and create opportunities for open innovation.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2017.06.035
PMID: 28684136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. PLoS One. 2017 Jun 29;12(6):e0179804. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179804. 
eCollection 2017.

Machine learning and microsimulation techniques on the prognosis of dementia: A 
systematic literature review.

Dallora AL(1), Eivazzadeh S(2), Mendes E(1), Berglund J(2), Anderberg P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Blekinge Institute of Technology, Karlskrona, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Health, Blekinge Institute of Technology, Karlskrona, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Dementia is a complex disorder characterized by poor outcomes for 
the patients and high costs of care. After decades of research little is known 
about its mechanisms. Having prognostic estimates about dementia can help 
researchers, patients and public entities in dealing with this disorder. Thus, 
health data, machine learning and microsimulation techniques could be employed 
in developing prognostic estimates for dementia.
OBJECTIVE: The goal of this paper is to present evidence on the state of the art 
of studies investigating and the prognosis of dementia using machine learning 
and microsimulation techniques.
METHOD: To achieve our goal we carried out a systematic literature review, in 
which three large databases-Pubmed, Socups and Web of Science were searched to 
select studies that employed machine learning or microsimulation techniques for 
the prognosis of dementia. A single backward snowballing was done to identify 
further studies. A quality checklist was also employed to assess the quality of 
the evidence presented by the selected studies, and low quality studies were 
removed. Finally, data from the final set of studies were extracted in summary 
tables.
RESULTS: In total 37 papers were included. The data summary results showed that 
the current research is focused on the investigation of the patients with mild 
cognitive impairment that will evolve to Alzheimer's disease, using machine 
learning techniques. Microsimulation studies were concerned with cost estimation 
and had a populational focus. Neuroimaging was the most commonly used variable.
CONCLUSIONS: Prediction of conversion from MCI to AD is the dominant theme in 
the selected studies. Most studies used ML techniques on Neuroimaging data. Only 
a few data sources have been recruited by most studies and the ADNI database is 
the one most commonly used. Only two studies have investigated the prediction of 
epidemiological aspects of Dementia using either ML or MS techniques. Finally, 
care should be taken when interpreting the reported accuracy of ML techniques, 
given studies' different contexts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179804
PMCID: PMC5491044
PMID: 28662070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


48. Alzheimers Dement. 2017 Apr;13(4):e1-e85. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.11.007. Epub 
2017 Mar 22.

Recent publications from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative: 
Reviewing progress toward improved AD clinical trials.

Weiner MW(1), Veitch DP(2), Aisen PS(3), Beckett LA(4), Cairns NJ(5), Green 
RC(6), Harvey D(4), Jack CR Jr(7), Jagust W(8), Morris JC(3), Petersen RC(9), 
Saykin AJ(10), Shaw LM(11), Toga AW(12), Trojanowski JQ(13); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Radiology, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Psychiatry, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Neurology, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
michael.weiner@ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute, University of Southern 
California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Sciences, University 
of California, Davis, CA, USA.
(5)Knight Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA; Department of Neurology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA.
(6)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(8)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(10)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(11)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(12)Laboratory of Neuroimaging, Institute of Neuroimaging and Informatics, Keck 
School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(13)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Institute on Aging, 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; 
Alzheimer's Disease Core Center, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Udall Parkinson's Research Center, Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) has 
continued development and standardization of methodologies for biomarkers and 
has provided an increased depth and breadth of data available to qualified 
researchers. This review summarizes the over 400 publications using ADNI data 
during 2014 and 2015.
METHODS: We used standard searches to find publications using ADNI data.
RESULTS: (1) Structural and functional changes, including subtle changes to 
hippocampal shape and texture, atrophy in areas outside of hippocampus, and 
disruption to functional networks, are detectable in presymptomatic subjects 
before hippocampal atrophy; (2) In subjects with abnormal β-amyloid deposition 
(Aβ+), biomarkers become abnormal in the order predicted by the amyloid cascade 
hypothesis; (3) Cognitive decline is more closely linked to tau than Aβ 
deposition; (4) Cerebrovascular risk factors may interact with Aβ to increase 
white-matter (WM) abnormalities which may accelerate Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
progression in conjunction with tau abnormalities; (5) Different patterns of 
atrophy are associated with impairment of memory and executive function and may 
underlie psychiatric symptoms; (6) Structural, functional, and metabolic network 
connectivities are disrupted as AD progresses. Models of prion-like spreading of 
Aβ pathology along WM tracts predict known patterns of cortical Aβ deposition 
and declines in glucose metabolism; (7) New AD risk and protective gene loci 
have been identified using biologically informed approaches; (8) Cognitively 
normal and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) subjects are heterogeneous and 
include groups typified not only by "classic" AD pathology but also by normal 
biomarkers, accelerated decline, and suspected non-Alzheimer's pathology; (9) 
Selection of subjects at risk of imminent decline on the basis of one or more 
pathologies improves the power of clinical trials; (10) Sensitivity of cognitive 
outcome measures to early changes in cognition has been improved and surrogate 
outcome measures using longitudinal structural magnetic resonance imaging may 
further reduce clinical trial cost and duration; (11) Advances in machine 
learning techniques such as neural networks have improved diagnostic and 
prognostic accuracy especially in challenges involving MCI subjects; and (12) 
Network connectivity measures and genetic variants show promise in multimodal 
classification and some classifiers using single modalities are rivaling 
multimodal classifiers.
DISCUSSION: Taken together, these studies fundamentally deepen our understanding 
of AD progression and its underlying genetic basis, which in turn informs and 
improves clinical trial design.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.11.007
PMCID: PMC6818723
PMID: 28342697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Alzheimers Dement. 2017 May;13(5):561-571. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.10.006. Epub 
2016 Dec 5.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 3: Continued innovation for 
clinical trial improvement.

Weiner MW(1), Veitch DP(2), Aisen PS(3), Beckett LA(4), Cairns NJ(5), Green 
RC(6), Harvey D(4), Jack CR Jr(7), Jagust W(8), Morris JC(3), Petersen RC(9), 
Salazar J(3), Saykin AJ(10), Shaw LM(11), Toga AW(12), Trojanowski JQ(13); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Radiology, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Psychiatry, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Neurology, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
michael.weiner@ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute, University of Southern 
California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Sciences, University 
of California, Davis, CA, USA.
(5)Knight Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA; Department of Neurology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA.
(6)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(8)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(10)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(11)Tailored Therapeutics, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(12)Laboratory of Neuroimaging, Institute of Neuroimaging and Informatics, Keck 
School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(13)Institute on Aging, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA; Alzheimer's Disease Core Center, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Udall Parkinson's 
Research Center, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Center 
for Neurodegenerative Research, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The overall goal of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) is to validate biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
clinical trials. ADNI-3, which began on August 1, 2016, is a 5-year renewal of 
the current ADNI-2 study.
METHODS: ADNI-3 will follow current and additional subjects with normal 
cognition, mild cognitive impairment, and AD using innovative technologies such 
as tau imaging, magnetic resonance imaging sequences for connectivity analyses, 
and a highly automated immunoassay platform and mass spectroscopy approach for 
cerebrospinal fluid biomarker analysis. A Systems Biology/pathway approach will 
be used to identify genetic factors for subject selection/enrichment. Amyloid 
positron emission tomography scanning will be standardized using the Centiloid 
method. The Brain Health Registry will help recruit subjects and monitor subject 
cognition.
RESULTS: Multimodal analyses will provide insight into AD pathophysiology and 
disease progression.
DISCUSSION: ADNI-3 will aim to inform AD treatment trials and facilitate 
development of AD disease-modifying treatments.

Copyright © 2016 the Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.10.006
PMCID: PMC5536850
PMID: 27931796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: Dallas P. Veitch has no 
conflicts of interest to report. Dr. Jack has provided consulting services for 
Eli Lily and owns stock in Johnson and Johnson. Dr. Jagust consults for 
Genentech Inc., Banner Alzheimer Institute, Bioclinica, and Novartis Dr. 
Petersen consults for Roche Inc., Merck Inc., Genetech Inc., and Biogen Inc.


50. Transl Res. 2016 Sep;175:37-53. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2016.03.005. Epub 2016 Mar 
12.

Neuroimaging in Alzheimer's disease: preclinical challenges toward clinical 
efficacy.

Dustin D(1), Hall BM(2), Annapragada A(3), Pautler RG(4).

Author information:
(1)Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine Graduate Program, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, Tex.
(2)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Tex.
(3)Department of Radiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Tex; Department 
of Radiology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Tex.
(4)Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine Graduate Program, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, Tex; Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Tex; Department of Radiology, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, Tex; Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Tex; Small Animal Imaging Facility, Texas Children's 
Hospital, Houston, Tex. Electronic address: rpautler@bcm.edu.

The scope of this review focuses on recent applications in preclinical and 
clinical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) toward accomplishing the goals of 
early detection and responses to therapy in animal models of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). Driven by the outstanding efforts of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI), a truly invaluable resource, the initial use of MRI in AD 
imaging has been to assess changes in brain anatomy, specifically assessing 
brain shrinkage and regional changes in white matter tractography using 
diffusion tensor imaging. However, advances in MRI have led to multiple efforts 
toward imaging amyloid beta plaques first without and then with the use of MRI 
contrast agents. These technological advancements have met with limited success 
and are not yet appropriate for the clinic. Recent developments in molecular 
imaging inclusive of high-power liposomal-based MRI contrast agents as well as 
fluorine 19 ((19)F) MRI and manganese enhanced MRI have begun to propel 
promising advances toward not only plaque imaging but also using MRI to detect 
perturbations in subcellular processes occurring within the neuron. This review 
concludes with a discussion about the necessity for the development of novel 
preclinical models of AD that better recapitulate human AD for the imaging to 
truly be meaningful and for substantive progress to be made toward understanding 
and effectively treating AD. Furthermore, the continued support of outstanding 
programs such as ADNI as well as the development of novel molecular imaging 
agents and MRI fast scanning sequences will also be requisite to effectively 
translate preclinical findings to the clinic.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trsl.2016.03.005
PMID: 27033146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mov Disord Clin Pract. 2016 Feb 11;3(3):230-240. doi: 10.1002/mdc3.12315. 
eCollection 2016 May-Jun.

Standardized Assessment of Hereditary Ataxia Patients in Clinical Studies.

Paap BK(1), Roeske S(1), Durr A(2)(3), Schöls L(4)(5), Ashizawa T(6), Boesch 
S(7), Bunn LM(8), Delatycki MB(9)(10), Giunti P(11), Lehéricy S(3)(12)(13), 
Mariotti C(14), Melegh J(15), Pandolfo M(16), Tallaksen CME(17)(18), Timmann 
D(19), Tsuji S(20), Schulz JB(21), van de Warrenburg BP(22), Klockgether 
T(1)(23).

Author information:
(1)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Bonn Germany.
(2)APHP Department of Genetics Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière Paris 
France.
(3)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle INSERM U1127 CNRS UMR7225 Sorbonne 
Universités-UPMC Université Paris VI UMR_S1127 Paris France.
(4)Department of Neurology and Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain Research 
University of Tübingen Tübingen Germany.
(5)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Tübingen Germany.
(6)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience Research Program Methodist Hospital 
Research Institute Houston Texas USA.
(7)Department of Neurology Medical University Innsbruck Innsbruck Austria.
(8)School of Health Professions Peninsula Allied Health Center University of 
Plymouth United Kingdom.
(9)Murdoch Children's Research Institute Melbourne Australia.
(10)Clinical Genetics Austin Health Heidelberg Victoria Australia.
(11)Ataxia Centre Department of Molecularneuroscience UCL Institute of Neurology 
London United Kingdom.
(12)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle (ICM) epiniere Centre de NeuroImagerie 
de Recherche (CENIR) Paris France.
(13)Service de Neuroradiologie Groupe Hospitalier Pitie-Salpetriere Paris 
France.
(14)Unit of Genetics of Neurodegenerative and Metabolic Disorders Fondazione 
IRCCS-Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta Milan Italy.
(15)Department of Medical Genetics and Szentagothai Research Center University 
of Pécs Pécs Hungary.
(16)Université Libre de Bruxelles Brussels Belgium.
(17)Department of Neurology Oslo University Hospital Oslo Norway.
(18)Faculty of Medicine Oslo University Oslo Norway.
(19)Department of Neurology Essen University Hospital University of 
Duisburg-Essen Essen Germany.
(20)Department of Neurology Graduate School of Medicine The University of Tokyo 
Tokyo Japan.
(21)Department of Neurology and JARA Brain University Hospital RWTH Aachen 
Aachen Germany.
(22)Department of Neurology Radboud University Medical Center Donders Institute 
for Brain, Cognition, and Behavior Nijmegen The Netherlands.
(23)Department of Neurology University Hospital of Bonn Bonn Germany.

BACKGROUND: Hereditary ataxias are a heterogeneous group of degenerative 
diseases of the cerebellum, brainstem, and spinal cord. They may present with 
isolated ataxia or with additional symptoms going beyond cerebellar deficits. 
There are an increasing number of clinical studies with the goal to define the 
natural history of these disorders, develop biomarkers, and investigate 
therapeutic interventions. Especially, early and preclinical disease stages are 
currently of particular interest.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Evidence-based, we review standards for sampling and 
storage of biomaterials, clinical and neuropsychological assessment, as well as 
neurophysiology and neuroimaging and recommendations for standardized assessment 
of ataxia patients in multicenter studies.
CONCLUSIONS: DNA, RNA, serum, and, if possible, cerebrospinal fluid samples 
should be processed following established standards. Clinical assessment in 
ataxia studies must include use of a validated clinical ataxia scale. There are 
several validated clinical ataxia scales available. There are no instruments 
that were specifically designed for assessing neuropsychological and psychiatric 
symptoms in ataxia disorders. We provide a list of tests that may prove 
valuable. Quantitative performance tests have the potential to supplement 
clinical scales. They provide additional objective and quantitative information. 
Posturography and quantitative movement analysis-despite valid 
approaches-require standardization before implemented in multicenter studies. 
Standardization of neurophysiological tools, as required for multicenter 
interventional trials, is still lacking. Future multicenter neuroimaging studies 
in ataxias should implement quality assurance measures as defined by the ADNI or 
other consortia. MRI protocols should allow morphometric analyses.

DOI: 10.1002/mdc3.12315
PMCID: PMC6178745
PMID: 30363623


52. Neuroimage. 2017 Jan 15;145(Pt B):389-408. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.11.057. Epub 2015 Dec 4.

ENIGMA and the individual: Predicting factors that affect the brain in 35 
countries worldwide.

Thompson PM(1), Andreassen OA(2), Arias-Vasquez A(3), Bearden CE(4), Boedhoe 
PS(5), Brouwer RM(6), Buckner RL(7), Buitelaar JK(8), Bulayeva KB(9), Cannon 
DM(10), Cohen RA(11), Conrod PJ(12), Dale AM(13), Deary IJ(14), Dennis EL(15), 
de Reus MA(6), Desrivieres S(16), Dima D(17), Donohoe G(18), Fisher SE(19), 
Fouche JP(20), Francks C(19), Frangou S(21), Franke B(22), Ganjgahi H(23), 
Garavan H(24), Glahn DC(25), Grabe HJ(26), Guadalupe T(27), Gutman BA(15), 
Hashimoto R(28), Hibar DP(15), Holland D(13), Hoogman M(29), Hulshoff Pol HE(6), 
Hosten N(30), Jahanshad N(15), Kelly S(15), Kochunov P(31), Kremen WS(32), Lee 
PH(33), Mackey S(34), Martin NG(35), Mazoyer B(36), McDonald C(37), Medland 
SE(35), Morey RA(38), Nichols TE(39), Paus T(40), Pausova Z(41), Schmaal L(42), 
Schumann G(16), Shen L(43), Sisodiya SM(44), Smit DJA(45), Smoller JW(46), Stein 
DJ(47), Stein JL(48), Toro R(49), Turner JA(50), van den Heuvel MP(6), van den 
Heuvel OL(5), van Erp TGM(51), van Rooij D(52), Veltman DJ(5), Walter H(53), 
Wang Y(54), Wardlaw JM(55), Whelan CD(15), Wright MJ(56), Ye J(57); ENIGMA 
Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Imaging Genetics Center, Mark and Mary Stevens Institute for Neuroimaging & 
Informatics, Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, 
Marina del Rey 90292, USA; Departments of Neurosciences, Radiology, Psychiatry, 
and Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego 92093, CA, USA.
(2)NORMENT-KG Jebsen Centre, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Oslo 0315, Norway; NORMENT-KG Jebsen Centre, Division of Mental Health and 
Addiction, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo 0315, Norway.
(3)Donders Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Departments of Psychiatry, Human 
Genetics & Cognitive Neuroscience, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen 
6525, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Psychiatry & Biobehavioral Sciences, University of California, 
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Dept. of Psychology, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Brain Research Institute, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(5)Department of Anatomy & Neurosciences, VU University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Psychiatry, VU University Medical 
Center (VUMC), Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, 
VU/VUMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, Department of Psychiatry, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht 
3584 CX, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114, USA.
(8)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University 
Medical Center, Nijmegen 6500 HB, The Netherlands; Department of Psychology, 
Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
(9)N.I. Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Gubkin str. 3, Moscow 119991, Russia.
(10)National Institute of Mental Health Intramural Research Program, Bethesda 
20892, USA; Neuroimaging & Cognitive Genomics Centre (NICOG), Clinical 
Neuroimaging Laboratory, NCBES Galway Neuroscience Centre, College of Medicine 
Nursing and Health Sciences, National University of Ireland Galway, H91 TK33 
Galway, Ireland.
(11)Institute on Aging, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA.
(12)Department of Psychological Medicine and Psychiatry, Section of Addiction, 
King's College London, University of London, UK.
(13)Departments of Neurosciences, Radiology, Psychiatry, and Cognitive Science, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0841, USA.
(14)Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive Epidemiology, Psychology, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ, UK.
(15)Imaging Genetics Center, Mark and Mary Stevens Institute for Neuroimaging & 
Informatics, Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, 
Marina del Rey 90292, USA.
(16)MRC-SGDP Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London SE5 
8AF, UK.
(17)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King׳s College London, 
UK; Clinical Neuroscience Studies (CNS) Center, Department of Psychiatry, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, USA.
(18)Neuroimaging and Cognitive Genomics center (NICOG), School of Psychology, 
National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
(19)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for 
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen 6525 XD, The Netherlands; Donders Institute for 
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen 6500 
HB, The Netherlands.
(20)Department of Psychiatry and Mental Health, University of Cape Town, Cape 
Town, South Africa.
(21)Clinical Neuroscience Studies (CNS) Center, Department of Psychiatry, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, USA.
(22)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen 
6525, The Netherlands; Department of Psychiatry, Radboud University Medical 
Center, Nijmegen 6525, The Netherlands; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen 6500 HB, The 
Netherlands.
(23)Department of Statistics, The University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.
(24)Psychiatry Department, University of Vermont, VT, USA.
(25)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA; Olin 
Neuropsychiatric Research Center, Hartford, CT 06114, USA.
(26)Department of Psychiatry, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald 17489, 
Germany; Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, HELIOS Hospital, Stralsund 
18435, Germany.
(27)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for 
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen 6525 XD, The Netherlands; International Max Planck 
Research School for Language Sciences, Nijmegen 6525 XD, The Netherlands.
(28)Molecular Research Center for Children's Mental Development, United Graduate 
School of Child Development, Osaka University, Japan.
(29)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen 
6525, The Netherlands; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen 6500 HB, The Netherlands.
(30)Department of Radiology University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald 17475, 
Germany.
(31)Department of Psychiatry, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(32)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA.
(33)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, USA; 
Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, USA; Stanley Center for 
Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, USA.
(34)Department of Psychiatry, University of Vermont, Burlington 05401, VT, USA.
(35)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane 4006, Australia.
(36)Groupe d'imagerie Neurofonctionnelle, UMR5296 CNRS CEA Université de 
Bordeaux, France.
(37)Neuroimaging & Cognitive Genomics Centre (NICOG), Clinical Neuroimaging 
Laboratory, NCBES Galway Neuroscience Centre, College of Medicine Nursing and 
Health Sciences, National University of Ireland Galway, H91 TK33 Galway, 
Ireland.
(38)Duke Institute for Brain Sciences, Duke University, NC 27710, USA.
(39)Department of Statistics & WMG, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK; 
FMRIB Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.
(40)Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, Toronto, ON, Canada; Departments of 
Psychology and Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; Child Mind 
Institute, NY, USA.
(41)The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; 
Departments of Physiology and Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.
(42)Department of Psychiatry, VU University Medical Center (VUMC), Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands; Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU/VUMC, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(43)Center for Neuroimaging, Dept. of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, 355 W. 16th Street, Suite 4100, Indianapolis, IN 
46202, USA; Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, 355 W. 16th Street, Suite 4100, Indianapolis, IN 
46202, USA.
(44)Department of Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy, UCL Institute of 
Neurology, London WC1N 3BG, UK and Epilepsy Society, Bucks, UK.
(45)Department of Biological Psychology, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands; Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU/VUMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(46)Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Center for Human Genetic 
Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, USA.
(47)Department of Psychiatry and Mental Health, University of Cape Town, Cape 
Town, South Africa; MRC Research Unit on Anxiety & Stress Disorders, South 
Africa.
(48)Imaging Genetics Center, Mark and Mary Stevens Institute for Neuroimaging & 
Informatics, Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, 
Marina del Rey 90292, USA; Neurogenetics Program, Department of Neurology, UCLA 
School of Medicine, Los Angeles 90095, USA.
(49)Institut Pasteur, Paris, 75015, France.
(50)Departments of Psychology and Neuroscience, Georgia State University, 
Atlanta, GA 30302, USA.
(51)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of California, 
Irvine, CA 92617, USA.
(52)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University 
Medical Center, Nijmegen 6500 HB, The Netherlands.
(53)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Charité Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, CCM, Berlin 10117, Germany.
(54)School of Computing, Informatics and Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona 
State University, AZ 85281, USA.
(55)Brain Research Imaging Centre, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, 
UK; Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive Epidemiology, Psychology, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ, UK; Centre for Clinical Brain 
Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK.
(56)Queensland Brain Institute, University of Queensland, Brisbane 4072, 
Australia.
(57)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; Department of Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

In this review, we discuss recent work by the ENIGMA Consortium 
(http://enigma.ini.usc.edu) - a global alliance of over 500 scientists spread 
across 200 institutions in 35 countries collectively analyzing brain imaging, 
clinical, and genetic data. Initially formed to detect genetic influences on 
brain measures, ENIGMA has grown to over 30 working groups studying 12 major 
brain diseases by pooling and comparing brain data. In some of the largest 
neuroimaging studies to date - of schizophrenia and major depression - ENIGMA 
has found replicable disease effects on the brain that are consistent worldwide, 
as well as factors that modulate disease effects. In partnership with other 
consortia including ADNI, CHARGE, IMAGEN and others1, ENIGMA's genomic screens - 
now numbering over 30,000 MRI scans - have revealed at least 8 genetic loci that 
affect brain volumes. Downstream of gene findings, ENIGMA has revealed how these 
individual variants - and genetic variants in general - may affect both the 
brain and risk for a range of diseases. The ENIGMA consortium is discovering 
factors that consistently affect brain structure and function that will serve as 
future predictors linking individual brain scans and genomic data. It is 
generating vast pools of normative data on brain measures - from tens of 
thousands of people - that may help detect deviations from normal development or 
aging in specific groups of subjects. We discuss challenges and opportunities in 
applying these predictors to individual subjects and new cohorts, as well as 
lessons we have learned in ENIGMA's efforts so far.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.11.057
PMCID: PMC4893347
PMID: 26658930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Alzheimers Dement. 2015 Jul;11(7):865-84. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.04.005.

Impact of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, 2004 to 2014.

Weiner MW(1), Veitch DP(2), Aisen PS(3), Beckett LA(4), Cairns NJ(5), Cedarbaum 
J(6), Donohue MC(7), Green RC(8), Harvey D(4), Jack CR Jr(9), Jagust W(10), 
Morris JC(11), Petersen RC(12), Saykin AJ(13), Shaw L(14), Thompson PM(15), Toga 
AW(16), Trojanowski JQ(17); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Radiology, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of 
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA; 
Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Neurology, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: michael.weiner@ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, University of California- San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(4)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Sciences, University 
of California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Knight Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, 
Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA; Department of 
Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA.
(6)Neurology Early Clinical Development, Biogen Idec, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(7)Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Department of Family Medicine 
and Public Health, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.
(8)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(9)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(10)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute and the School of Public Health, 
University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(11)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, MO, USA.
(12)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(13)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(14)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(15)Imaging Genetics Center, Institute for Neuroimaging and Informatics, 
University of Southern California, Marina Del Rey, CA, USA.
(16)Laboratory of Neuroimaging, Institute of Neuroimaging and Informatics, Keck 
School of Medicine of University of Southern California Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(17)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Center for 
Neurodegenerative Research, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Institute on Aging, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Alzheimer's Disease 
Core Center, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA; Udall Parkinson's Research Center, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) was 
established in 2004 to facilitate the development of effective treatments for 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) by validating biomarkers for AD clinical trials.
METHODS: We searched for ADNI publications using established methods.
RESULTS: ADNI has (1) developed standardized biomarkers for use in clinical 
trial subject selection and as surrogate outcome measures; (2) standardized 
protocols for use across multiple centers; (3) initiated worldwide ADNI; (4) 
inspired initiatives investigating traumatic brain injury and post-traumatic 
stress disorder in military populations, and depression, respectively, as an AD 
risk factor; (5) acted as a data-sharing model; (6) generated data used in over 
600 publications, leading to the identification of novel AD risk alleles, and an 
understanding of the relationship between biomarkers and AD progression; and (7) 
inspired other public-private partnerships developing biomarkers for Parkinson's 
disease and multiple sclerosis.
DISCUSSION: ADNI has made myriad impacts in its first decade. A competitive 
renewal of the project in 2015 would see the use of newly developed tau imaging 
ligands, and the continued development of recruitment strategies and outcome 
measures for clinical trials.

Copyright © 2015 The Alzheimer's Association. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.04.005
PMCID: PMC4659407
PMID: 26194320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Alzheimers Dement. 2015 Jul;11(7):860-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.006.

The impact of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2: What role do 
public-private partnerships have in pushing the boundaries of clinical and basic 
science research on Alzheimer's disease?

Jones-Davis DM(1), Buckholtz N(2).

Author information:
(1)Foundation for the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. 
Electronic address: djones-davis@fnih.org.
(2)National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.

In the growing landscape of biomedical public-private-partnerships, particularly 
for Alzheimer's disease, the question is posed as to their value. What impacts 
do public-private-partnerships have on clinical and basic science research in 
Alzheimer's disease? The authors answer the question using the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) as a test case and example. ADNI is an 
exemplar of how public-private-partnerships can make an impact not only on 
clinical and basic science research and practice (including clinical trials), 
but also of how similar partnerships using ADNI as an example, can be designed 
to create a maximal impact within their fields.

Copyright © 2015 The Alzheimer's Association. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.006
PMCID: PMC4513361
PMID: 26194319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Alzheimers Dement. 2015 Jul;11(7):850-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.008.

The Worldwide Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative: An update.

Hendrix JA(1), Finger B(2), Weiner MW(3), Frisoni GB(4), Iwatsubo T(5), Rowe 
CC(6), Kim SY(7), Guinjoan SM(8), Sevlever G(8), Carrillo MC(9).

Author information:
(1)Medical & Scientific Relations, Alzheimer's Association, Chicago, IL, USA. 
Electronic address: jhendrix@alz.org.
(2)Independent Science Writer, Evanston, IL, USA.
(3)Center for Imaging of Neurodegenerative Diseases (CIND), Northern California 
Institute of Research, San Francisco VA Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA; 
Department of Radiology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Neuroimaging of Aging, University Hospitals and University of 
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Neuropathology, Graduate School of Medicine, the University 
Hospital of Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Molecular Imaging, Austin Health, Melbourne, Australia.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Asian Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(8)Aging and Memory Center, Instituto de Investigaciones Neurologicas Raul 
Carrea (FLENI), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(9)Medical & Scientific Relations, Alzheimer's Association, Chicago, IL, USA.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), launched in 2004, has 
worked to accelerate drug development by validating imaging and 
blood/cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease clinical treatment 
trials. ADNI is a naturalistic (nontreatment) multisite longitudinal study. A 
true public-private partnership, the initiative has set a new standard for data 
sharing without embargo and for the use of biomarkers in dementia research. The 
ADNI effort in North America is not the only such effort in the world. The 
Alzheimer's Association recognized these global efforts and formed Worldwide 
ADNI (WW-ADNI). By creating a platform for international collaboration and 
cooperation, WW-ADNI's goals are to harmonize projects and results across 
geographical regions and to facilitate data management and availability to 
investigators around the world. WW-ADNI projects include those based in North 
America, Europe, Japan, Australia, Korea, and Argentina.

Copyright © 2015 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.008
PMID: 26194318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Alzheimers Dement. 2015 Jul;11(7):840-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.04.001.

Perspective: The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative and the role and 
contributions of the Private Partner Scientific Board (PPSB).

Liu E(1), Luthman J(2), Cedarbaum JM(3), Schmidt ME(4), Cole PE(5), Hendrix 
J(6), Carrillo MC(6), Jones-Davis D(7), Tarver E(7), Novak G(8), De Santi S(9), 
Soares HD(10), Potter WZ(11), Siemers E(12), Schwarz AJ(13).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Biomarkers, Discovery, Janssen Research and Development, San 
Diego, CA, USA. Electronic address: eliu12@its.jnj.com.
(2)Neuroscience Clinical Development, Clinical Neuroscience Eisai, Woodcliff 
Lake, NJ, USA.
(3)Clinical Development, Biogen, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Experimental Medicine, Janssen Pharmaceutica NV, Beerse, Belgium.
(5)Clinical and Translational Science, Imaging, Takeda Pharmaceuticals, Inc, 
Deerfield, IL, USA.
(6)Medical and Scientific Relations, Alzheimer's Association, Chicago, IL, USA.
(7)Foundation for the NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(8)Neuroscience Clinical Development, Janssen Research and Development, 
Titusville, NJ, USA.
(9)Medical Affairs, Piramal Pharma Inc, Boston, MA, USA.
(10)Clinical Biomarkers, Bristol-Meyer Squibb, Hopewell, NJ, USA.
(11)Office of the Director, National Institute of Mental Health, Rockville, MD, 
USA.
(12)Biomedicines Business Unit, Alzheimer's Disease Platform Team, Eli Lilly and 
Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(13)Tailored Therapeutics, Eli Lilly and company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) Private Partner 
Scientific Board (PPSB) is comprised of representatives of private, for-profit 
entities (including pharmaceutical, biotechnology, diagnostics, imaging 
companies, and imaging contract research organizations), and nonprofit 
organizations that provide financial and scientific support to ADNI through the 
Foundation for the National Institutes of Health. The PPSB serves as an 
independent, open, and precompetitive forum in which all private sector and 
not-for-profit partners in ADNI can collaborate, share information, and offer 
scientific and private-sector perspectives and expertise on issues relating to 
the ADNI project. In this article, we review and highlight the role, activities, 
and contributions of the PPSB within the ADNI project, and provide a perspective 
on remaining unmet needs and future directions.

Copyright © 2015 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.04.001
PMID: 26194317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Alzheimers Dement. 2015 Jul;11(7):832-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.04.004.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative informatics core: A decade in 
review.

Toga AW(1), Crawford KL(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging (LONI), USC Mark and Mary Stevens Neuroimaging 
and Informatics Institute, Keck School of Medicine of USC, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
toga@loni.usc.edu.
(2)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging (LONI), USC Mark and Mary Stevens Neuroimaging 
and Informatics Institute, Keck School of Medicine of USC, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

The Informatics Core of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative has 
coordinated data integration and dissemination for a continually growing and 
complex data set in which both data contributors and recipients span 
institutions, scientific disciplines, and geographic boundaries. This article 
provides an update on the accomplishments and future plans.

Copyright © 2015 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.04.004
PMCID: PMC4510464
PMID: 26194316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interests None


58. Alzheimers Dement. 2015 Jul;11(7):823-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.004.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative phase 2: Increasing the length, 
breadth, and depth of our understanding.

Beckett LA(1), Donohue MC(2), Wang C(3), Aisen P(4), Harvey DJ(3), Saito N(3); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Sciences, University 
of California, Davis, CA, USA. Electronic address: labeckett@ucdavis.edu.
(2)Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Department of Family Medicine 
and Public Health, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(3)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Sciences, University 
of California, Davis, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) is a 
multisite study designed to characterize the trajectories of biomarkers across 
the aging process. We present ADNI Biostatistics Core analyses that integrate 
data over the length, breadth, and depth of ADNI.
METHODS: Relative progression of key imaging, fluid, and clinical measures was 
assessed. Individuals with subjective memory complaints (SMC) and early mild 
cognitive impairment (eMCI) were compared with normal controls (NC), MCI, and 
individuals with Alzheimer's disease. Amyloid imaging and magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) summaries were assessed as predictors of disease progression.
RESULTS: Relative progression of markers supports parts of the amyloid cascade 
hypothesis, although evidence of earlier occurrence of cognitive change exists. 
SMC are similar to NC, whereas eMCI fall between the cognitively normal and MCI 
groups. Amyloid leads to faster conversion and increased cognitive impairment.
DISCUSSION: Analyses support features of the amyloid hypothesis, but also 
illustrate the considerable heterogeneity in the aging process.

Copyright © 2015 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.004
PMCID: PMC4510463
PMID: 26194315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Alzheimers Dement. 2015 Jul;11(7):815-22. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.010.

Brain collection, standardized neuropathologic assessment, and comorbidity in 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2 participants.

Franklin EE(1), Perrin RJ(2), Vincent B(2), Baxter M(2), Morris JC(3), Cairns 
NJ(3); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA. Electronic address: 
efranklin@path.wustl.edu.
(2)Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(3)Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; Department of Neurology, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative Neuropathology 
Core (ADNI-NPC) facilitates brain donation, ensures standardized neuropathologic 
assessments, and maintains a tissue resource for research.
METHODS: The ADNI-NPC coordinates with performance sites to promote autopsy 
consent, facilitate tissue collection and autopsy administration, and arrange 
sample delivery to the NPC, for assessment using National Institute on 
Aging-Alzheimer's Association neuropathologic diagnostic criteria.
RESULTS: The ADNI-NPC has obtained 45 participant specimens, and neuropathologic 
assessments have been completed in 36 to date. Challenges in obtaining consent 
at some sites have limited the voluntary autopsy rate to 58%. Among assessed 
cases, clinical diagnostic accuracy for Alzheimer disease (AD) is 97%; however, 
58% of cases show neuropathologic comorbidities.
DISCUSSION: Challenges facing autopsy consent and coordination are largely 
resource related. The neuropathologic assessments indicate that ADNI's clinical 
diagnostic accuracy for AD is high; however, many AD cases have comorbidities 
that may impact the clinical presentation, course, and imaging and biomarker 
results. These neuropathologic data permit multimodal and genetic studies of 
these comorbidities to improve diagnosis and provide etiologic insights.

Copyright © 2015 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.010
PMCID: PMC4511380
PMID: 26194314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Alzheimers Dement. 2015 Jul;11(7):792-814. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.009.

Genetic studies of quantitative MCI and AD phenotypes in ADNI: Progress, 
opportunities, and plans.

Saykin AJ(1), Shen L(2), Yao X(3), Kim S(4), Nho K(4), Risacher SL(4), Ramanan 
VK(5), Foroud TM(6), Faber KM(7), Sarwar N(8), Munsie LM(9), Hu X(10), Soares 
HD(10), Potkin SG(11), Thompson PM(12), Kauwe JS(13), Kaddurah-Daouk R(14), 
Green RC(15), Toga AW(16), Weiner MW(17); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; Indiana Alzheimer 
Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; 
Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. Electronic address: asaykin@iupui.edu.
(2)Center for Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; Indiana Alzheimer 
Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; 
Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(3)Center for Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; School of 
Informatics and Computing, Indiana University, Purdue University - Indianapolis, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(4)Center for Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; Indiana Alzheimer 
Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(5)Center for Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; Indiana Alzheimer 
Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; 
Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(6)Indiana Alzheimer Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA; Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(7)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(8)Eisai Ltd., Hatfield, Hertfordshire, UK.
(9)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(10)Bristol-Myers Squibb, Wallingford, CT, USA.
(11)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of California - 
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.
(12)Department of Neurology, Keck School of Medicine of USC, University of 
Southern California, Marina del Rey, CA, USA; Imaging Genetics Center, Keck 
School of Medicine of USC, University of Southern California, Marina del Rey, 
CA, USA.
(13)Department of Biology, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA; Department 
of Neuroscience, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA.
(14)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University, Durham, 
NC, USA; Duke Institute for Brain Sciences, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(15)Partners Center for Personalized Genetic Medicine, Boston, MA, USA; Division 
of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(16)Laboratory of Neuroimaging, Institute for Neuroimaging and Neuroinformatics, 
Keck School of Medicine of USC, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(17)Department of Radiology, University of California-San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Medicine, University of California-San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Psychiatry, University of 
California-San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA; Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco VA Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, 
USA.

INTRODUCTION: Genetic data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) have been crucial in advancing the understanding of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) pathophysiology. Here, we provide an update on sample collection, 
scientific progress and opportunities, conceptual issues, and future plans.
METHODS: Lymphoblastoid cell lines and DNA and RNA samples from blood have been 
collected and banked, and data and biosamples have been widely disseminated. To 
date, APOE genotyping, genome-wide association study (GWAS), and whole exome and 
whole genome sequencing data have been obtained and disseminated.
RESULTS: ADNI genetic data have been downloaded thousands of times, and >300 
publications have resulted, including reports of large-scale GWAS by consortia 
to which ADNI contributed. Many of the first applications of quantitative 
endophenotype association studies used ADNI data, including some of the earliest 
GWAS and pathway-based studies of biospecimen and imaging biomarkers, as well as 
memory and other clinical/cognitive variables. Other contributions include some 
of the first whole exome and whole genome sequencing data sets and reports in 
healthy controls, mild cognitive impairment, and AD.
DISCUSSION: Numerous genetic susceptibility and protective markers for AD and 
disease biomarkers have been identified and replicated using ADNI data and have 
heavily implicated immune, mitochondrial, cell cycle/fate, and other biological 
processes. Early sequencing studies suggest that rare and structural variants 
are likely to account for significant additional phenotypic variation. 
Longitudinal analyses of transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic, and epigenomic 
changes will also further elucidate dynamic processes underlying preclinical and 
prodromal stages of disease. Integration of this unique collection of multiomics 
data within a systems biology framework will help to separate truly informative 
markers of early disease mechanisms and potential novel therapeutic targets from 
the vast background of less relevant biological processes. Fortunately, a broad 
swath of the scientific community has accepted this grand challenge.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.009
PMCID: PMC4510473
PMID: 26194313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Alzheimers Dement. 2015 Jul;11(7):772-91. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.003.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2 Biomarker Core: A review of 
progress and plans.

Kang JH(1), Korecka M(2), Figurski MJ(2), Toledo JB(3), Blennow K(4), Zetterberg 
H(5), Waligorska T(2), Brylska M(2), Fields L(2), Shah N(2), Soares H(6), Dean 
RA(7), Vanderstichele H(8), Petersen RC(9), Aisen PS(10), Saykin AJ(11), Weiner 
MW(12), Trojanowski JQ(13), Shaw LM(14); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Pharmacology 
and Clinical Pharmacology, Hypoxia-Related Disease Research Center, Inha 
University School of Medicine, Incheon, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Center for Neurodegenerative 
Disease Research, Institute on Aging, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden; 
Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(6)Bristol Myers Squibb, Wallingford, CT, USA.
(7)Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(8)Biomarkable bvba, Gent, Belgium.
(9)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(10)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, 
CA, USA.
(11)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Center for Neuroimaging, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; Department of 
Medical and Molecular Genetics, Center for Computational Biology and 
Bioinformatics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(12)Department of Radiology, Medicine and Psychiatry, University of California, 
San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(13)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Center for Neurodegenerative 
Disease Research, Institute on Aging, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA; Department of Neurology, Morris K. Udall Center of Excellence for 
Parkinson's Disease Research, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(14)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Center for Neurodegenerative 
Disease Research, Institute on Aging, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA. Electronic address: Leslie.Shaw2@uphs.upenn.edu.

INTRODUCTION: We describe Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
Biomarker Core progress including: the Biobank; cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
amyloid beta (Aβ1-42), t-tau, and p-tau181 analytical performance, definition of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) profile for plaque, and tangle burden detection and 
increased risk for progression to AD; AD disease heterogeneity; progress in 
standardization; and new studies using ADNI biofluids.
METHODS: Review publications authored or coauthored by ADNI Biomarker core 
faculty and selected non-ADNI studies to deepen the understanding and 
interpretation of CSF Aβ1-42, t-tau, and p-tau181 data.
RESULTS: CSF AD biomarker measurements with the qualified AlzBio3 immunoassay 
detects neuropathologic AD hallmarks in preclinical and prodromal disease 
stages, based on CSF studies in non-ADNI living subjects followed by the autopsy 
confirmation of AD. Collaboration across ADNI cores generated the temporal 
ordering model of AD biomarkers varying across individuals because of 
genetic/environmental factors that increase/decrease resilience to AD 
pathologies.
DISCUSSION: Further studies will refine this model and enable the use of 
biomarkers studied in ADNI clinically and in disease-modifying therapeutic 
trials.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.003
PMCID: PMC5127404
PMID: 26194312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Alzheimers Dement. 2015 Jul;11(7):757-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.001.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2 PET Core: 2015.

Jagust WJ(1), Landau SM(2), Koeppe RA(3), Reiman EM(4), Chen K(4), Mathis CA(5), 
Price JC(5), Foster NL(6), Wang AY(6).

Author information:
(1)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 
USA. Electronic address: jagust@berkeley.edu.
(2)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 
USA.
(3)Division of Nuclear Medicine, Department of Radiology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Banner Alzheimer Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(5)Department of Radiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Center for Alzheimer's Care, Imaging and Research, 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

INTRODUCTION: This article reviews the work done in the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative positron emission tomography (ADNI PET) core over the 
past 5 years, largely concerning techniques, methods, and results related to 
amyloid imaging in ADNI.
METHODS: The PET Core has used [(18)F]florbetapir routinely on ADNI 
participants, with over 1600 scans available for download. Four different 
laboratories are involved in data analysis, and have examined factors such as 
longitudinal florbetapir analysis, use of [(18)F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET in 
clinical trials, and relationships between different biomarkers and cognition.
RESULTS: Converging evidence from the PET Core has indicated that 
cross-sectional and longitudinal florbetapir analyses require different 
reference regions. Studies have also examined the relationship between 
florbetapir data obtained immediately after injection, which reflects perfusion, 
and FDG-PET results. Finally, standardization has included the translation of 
florbetapir PET data to a centiloid scale.
CONCLUSION: The PET Core has demonstrated a variety of methods for the 
standardization of biomarkers such as florbetapir PET in a multicenter setting.

Copyright © 2015 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.001
PMCID: PMC4510459
PMID: 26194311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Alzheimers Dement. 2015 Jul;11(7):734-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.005.

Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2 Clinical Core: Progress and plans.

Aisen PS(1), Petersen RC(2), Donohue M(3), Weiner MW(4); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 
CA, USA. Electronic address: paisen@ucsd.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Department of Family Medicine 
and Public Health, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)Departments of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, Medicine, Psychiatry and 
Neurology, University of California San Francisco, San Fransisco, CA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: This article reviews the current status of the Clinical Core of 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), and summarizes planning 
for the next stage of the project.
METHODS: Clinical Core activities and plans were synthesized based on 
discussions among the Core leaders and external advisors.
RESULTS: The longitudinal data in ADNI-2 provide natural history data on a 
clinical trials population and continue to inform refinement and standardization 
of assessments, models of trajectories, and clinical trial methods that have 
been extended into sporadic preclinical Alzheimer's disease (AD).
DISCUSSION: Plans for the next phase of the ADNI project include maintaining 
longitudinal follow-up of the normal and mild cognitive impairment cohorts, 
augmenting specific clinical cohorts, and incorporating novel computerized 
cognitive assessments and patient-reported outcomes. A major hypothesis is that 
AD represents a gradually progressive disease that can be identified precisely 
in its long presymptomatic phase, during which intervention with potentially 
disease-modifying agents may be most useful.

Copyright © 2015 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.005
PMCID: PMC4643840
PMID: 26194309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts Data collection and sharing for this 
project were funded by the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
(National Institutes of Health Grant U01 AG024904). ADNI is funded by the 
National Institute on Aging, the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and 
Bioengineering, and through generous contributions from the following: 
Alzheimer’s Association; Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation; Araclon Biotech; 
BioClinica, Inc.; Biogen Idec Inc.; Bristol-Myers Squibb Company; Eisai Inc.; 
Elan Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Eli Lilly and Company; EuroImmun; F. Hoffmann-La 
Roche Ltd and its affiliated company Genentech, Inc.; Fujirebio; GE Healthcare; 
; IXICO Ltd.; Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy Research & Development, LLC.; 
Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical Research & Development LLC.; Medpace, Inc.; 
Merck & Co., Inc.; Meso Scale Diagnostics, LLC.; NeuroRx Research; Neurotrack 
Technologies; Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation; Pfizer Inc.; Piramal 
Imaging; Servier; Synarc Inc.; and Takeda Pharmaceutical Company. The Canadian 
Institutes of Health Research is providing funds to support ADNI clinical sites 
in Canada. Private sector contributions are facilitated by the Foundation for 
the National Institutes of Health (www.fnih.org). The grantee organization is 
the Northern California Institute for Research and Education, and the study is 
coordinated by the Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study at the University of 
California, San Diego. ADNI data are disseminated by the Laboratory for Neuro 
Imaging at the University of Southern California.


64. Alzheimers Dement. 2015 Jul;11(7):730-3. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.007.

Introduction to special issue: Overview of Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Weiner MW(1), Veitch DP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Radiology, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Psychiatry, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Neurology, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
michael.weiner@ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), designed as a 
naturalistic longitudinal study to develop and validate magnetic resonance, 
positron emission tomography, cerebrospinal fluid, and genetic biomarkers for 
use in AD clinical trials, has made many impacts in the decade since its 
inception. The initial 5-year study, ADNI-1, enrolled cognitively normal, mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD subjects, and the subsequent studies (ADNI-GO 
and ADNI-2) added early- and late-MCI cohorts. The development of standardized 
methods allowed comparison of data gathered across multiple sites, and these 
data are available to qualified researchers without embargo. ADNI data have been 
used in >600 publications including those describing relationships between 
biomarkers, improved methods for disease diagnosis and the prediction of future 
decline, and identifying novel genetic AD risk loci. ADNI has provided a 
framework for similar initiatives worldwide.

Copyright © 2015 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.007
PMCID: PMC5536175
PMID: 26194308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest Dallas P. Veitch has no 
conflicts of interest to report.


65. Alzheimers Dement. 2015 Jun;11(6):e1-120. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.11.001.

2014 Update of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative: A review of 
papers published since its inception.

Weiner MW(1), Veitch DP(2), Aisen PS(3), Beckett LA(4), Cairns NJ(5), Cedarbaum 
J(6), Green RC(7), Harvey D(4), Jack CR(8), Jagust W(9), Luthman J(10), Morris 
JC(3), Petersen RC(11), Saykin AJ(12), Shaw L(13), Shen L(14), Schwarz A(15), 
Toga AW(16), Trojanowski JQ(17); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Radiology, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Psychiatry, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Neurology, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
michael.weiner@ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(4)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Sciences, University 
of California, Davis, CA, USA.
(5)Knight Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA; Department of Neurology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA.
(6)Neurology Early Clinical Development, Biogen Idec, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(7)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(9)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(10)Neuroscience Clinical Development, Neuroscience & General Medicine Product 
Creation Unit, Eisai Inc., Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(11)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(12)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(13)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(14)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(15)Tailored Therapeutics, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(16)Laboratory of Neuroimaging, Institute of Neuroimaging and Informatics, Keck 
School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(17)Institute on Aging, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA; Alzheimer's Disease Core Center, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Udall Parkinson's 
Research Center, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Center 
for Neurodegenerative Research, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) is an ongoing, 
longitudinal, multicenter study designed to develop clinical, imaging, genetic, 
and biochemical biomarkers for the early detection and tracking of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). The initial study, ADNI-1, enrolled 400 subjects with early mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI), 200 with early AD, and 200 cognitively normal 
elderly controls. ADNI-1 was extended by a 2-year Grand Opportunities grant in 
2009 and by a competitive renewal, ADNI-2, which enrolled an additional 550 
participants and will run until 2015. This article reviews all papers published 
since the inception of the initiative and summarizes the results to the end of 
2013. The major accomplishments of ADNI have been as follows: (1) the 
development of standardized methods for clinical tests, magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET), and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
biomarkers in a multicenter setting; (2) elucidation of the patterns and rates 
of change of imaging and CSF biomarker measurements in control subjects, MCI 
patients, and AD patients. CSF biomarkers are largely consistent with disease 
trajectories predicted by β-amyloid cascade (Hardy, J Alzheimer's Dis 
2006;9(Suppl 3):151-3) and tau-mediated neurodegeneration hypotheses for AD, 
whereas brain atrophy and hypometabolism levels show predicted patterns but 
exhibit differing rates of change depending on region and disease severity; (3) 
the assessment of alternative methods of diagnostic categorization. Currently, 
the best classifiers select and combine optimum features from multiple 
modalities, including MRI, [(18)F]-fluorodeoxyglucose-PET, amyloid PET, CSF 
biomarkers, and clinical tests; (4) the development of blood biomarkers for AD 
as potentially noninvasive and low-cost alternatives to CSF biomarkers for AD 
diagnosis and the assessment of α-syn as an additional biomarker; (5) the 
development of methods for the early detection of AD. CSF biomarkers, β-amyloid 
42 and tau, as well as amyloid PET may reflect the earliest steps in AD 
pathology in mildly symptomatic or even nonsymptomatic subjects and are leading 
candidates for the detection of AD in its preclinical stages; (6) the 
improvement of clinical trial efficiency through the identification of subjects 
most likely to undergo imminent future clinical decline and the use of more 
sensitive outcome measures to reduce sample sizes. Multimodal methods 
incorporating APOE status and longitudinal MRI proved most highly predictive of 
future decline. Refinements of clinical tests used as outcome measures such as 
clinical dementia rating-sum of boxes further reduced sample sizes; (7) the 
pioneering of genome-wide association studies that leverage quantitative imaging 
and biomarker phenotypes, including longitudinal data, to confirm recently 
identified loci, CR1, CLU, and PICALM and to identify novel AD risk loci; (8) 
worldwide impact through the establishment of ADNI-like programs in Japan, 
Australia, Argentina, Taiwan, China, Korea, Europe, and Italy; (9) understanding 
the biology and pathobiology of normal aging, MCI, and AD through integration of 
ADNI biomarker and clinical data to stimulate research that will resolve 
controversies about competing hypotheses on the etiopathogenesis of AD, thereby 
advancing efforts to find disease-modifying drugs for AD; and (10) the 
establishment of infrastructure to allow sharing of all raw and processed data 
without embargo to interested scientific investigators throughout the world.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.11.001
PMCID: PMC5469297
PMID: 26073027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures Dallas P. Veitch has no conflicts to 
report. Robert C. Green has no conflicts of interest to report. Danielle Harvey 
has no conflicts of interest to report. Judith A. Siuciak has no conflicts of 
interest to report. Arthur W. Toga has no conflicts of interest to report.


66. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Jan 28;1(1):CD010632. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD010632.pub2.

¹⁸F-FDG PET for the early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease dementia and other 
dementias in people with mild cognitive impairment (MCI).

Smailagic N(1), Vacante M, Hyde C, Martin S, Ukoumunne O, Sachpekidis C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Public Health, University of Cambridge, Forvie Site, Robinson 
Way, Cambridge, UK, CB2 0SR.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD010632.

BACKGROUND: ¹⁸F-FDFG uptake by brain tissue as measured by positron emission 
tomography (PET) is a well-established method for assessment of brain function 
in people with dementia. Certain findings on brain PET scans can potentially 
predict the decline of mild cognitive Impairment (MCI) to Alzheimer's disease 
dementia or other dementias.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the diagnostic accuracy of the ¹⁸F-FDG PET index test 
for detecting people with MCI at baseline who would clinically convert to 
Alzheimer's disease dementia or other forms of dementia at follow-up.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Register of Diagnostic Test Accuracy 
Studies, MEDLINE, EMBASE, Science Citation Index, PsycINFO, BIOSIS previews, 
LILACS, MEDION, (Meta-analyses van Diagnostisch Onderzoek), DARE (Database of 
Abstracts of Reviews of Effects), HTA (Health Technology Assessment Database), 
ARIF (Aggressive Research Intelligence Facility) and C-EBLM (International 
Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine Committee for 
Evidence-based Laboratory Medicine) databases to January 2013. We checked the 
reference lists of any relevant studies and systematic reviews for additional 
studies.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included studies that evaluated the diagnostic accuracy 
of ¹⁸F-FDG PET to determine the conversion from MCI to Alzheimer's disease 
dementia or to other forms of dementia, i.e. any or all of vascular dementia, 
dementia with Lewy bodies, and fronto-temporal dementia. These studies 
necessarily employ delayed verification of conversion to dementia and are 
sometimes labelled as 'delayed verification cross-sectional studies'.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two blinded review authors independently extracted 
data, resolving disagreement by discussion, with the option to involve a third 
review author as arbiter if necessary. We extracted and summarised graphically 
the data for two-by-two tables. We conducted exploratory analyses by plotting 
estimates of sensitivity and specificity from each study on forest plots and in 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) space. When studies had mixed 
thresholds, we derived estimates of sensitivity and likelihood ratios at fixed 
values (lower quartile, median and upper quartile) of specificity from the 
hierarchical summary ROC (HSROC) models.
MAIN RESULTS: We included 14 studies (421 participants) in the analysis. The 
sensitivities for conversion from MCI to Alzheimer's disease dementia were 
between 25% and 100% while the specificities were between 15% and 100%. From the 
summary ROC curve we fitted we estimated that the sensitivity was 76% (95% 
confidence interval (CI): 53.8 to 89.7) at the included study median specificity 
of 82%. This equates to a positive likelihood ratio of 4.03 (95% CI: 2.97 to 
5.47), and a negative likelihood ratio of 0.34 (95% CI: 0.15 to 0.75). Three 
studies recruited participants from the same Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) cohort but only the largest ADNI study (Herholz 2011) is 
included in the meta-analysis. In order to demonstrate whether the choice of 
ADNI study or discriminating brain region (Chételat 2003) or reader assessment 
(Pardo 2010) make a difference to the pooled estimate, we performed five 
additional analyses. At the median specificity of 82%, the estimated sensitivity 
was between 74% and 76%. There was no impact on our findings. In addition to 
evaluating Alzheimer's disease dementia, five studies evaluated the accuracy of 
¹⁸F-FDG PET for all types of dementia. The sensitivities were between 46% and 
95% while the specificities were between 29% and 100%; however, we did not 
conduct a meta-analysis because of too few studies, and those studies which we 
had found recruited small numbers of participants. Our findings are based on 
studies with poor reporting, and the majority of included studies had an unclear 
risk of bias, mainly for the reference standard and participant selection 
domains. According to the assessment of Index test domain, more than 50% of 
studies were of poor methodological quality.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: It is difficult to determine to what extent the findings 
from the meta-analysis can be applied to clinical practice. Given the 
considerable variability of specificity values and lack of defined thresholds 
for determination of test positivity in the included studies, the current 
evidence does not support the routine use of ¹⁸F-FDG PET scans in clinical 
practice in people with MCI. The ¹⁸F-FDG PET scan is a high-cost investigation, 
and it is therefore important to clearly demonstrate its accuracy and to 
standardise the process of ¹⁸F-FDG PET diagnostic modality prior to its being 
widely used. Future studies with more uniform approaches to thresholds, analysis 
and study conduct may provide a more homogeneous estimate than the one available 
from the included studies we have identified.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD010632.pub2
PMCID: PMC7081123
PMID: 25629415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: NS, MV, CH, SM, OU, CS: declare no conflict of 
interest.


67. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2014 Aug 29;6(5):62. doi: 10.1186/s13195-014-0062-5. 
eCollection 2014.

Imago Mundi, Imago AD, Imago ADNI.

Villemagne VL(1), Kim SY(2), Rowe CC(3), Iwatsubo T(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine and Centre for PET, Austin Health, 145 Studley 
Road, Heidelberg 3084, VIC, Australia ; The Florey Institute for Neurosciences 
and Mental Health, The University of Melbourne, 30 Royal Parade, Melbourne 3010, 
VIC, Australia ; Department of Medicine, The University of Melbourne, Grattan 
Street, Melbourne 3010, VIC, Australia.
(2)Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan Medical College, 88 Olympic-Ro 
43-Gil, Songpa-Gu, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine and Centre for PET, Austin Health, 145 Studley 
Road, Heidelberg 3084, VIC, Australia ; Department of Medicine, The University 
of Melbourne, Grattan Street, Melbourne 3010, VIC, Australia.
(4)Department of Neuropathology, School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 
7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku 113-0033, Tokyo, Japan.

Since the launch in 2003 of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) in the USA, ever growing, similarly oriented consortia have been 
organized and assembled around the world. The various accomplishments of ADNI 
have contributed substantially to a better understanding of the underlying 
physiopathology of aging and Alzheimer's disease (AD). These accomplishments are 
basically predicated in the trinity of multimodality, standardization and 
sharing. This multimodality approach can now better identify those subjects with 
AD-specific traits that are more likely to present cognitive decline in the near 
future and that might represent the best candidates for smaller but more 
efficient therapeutic trials - trials that, through gained and shared knowledge, 
can be more focused on a specific target or a specific stage of the disease 
process. In summary, data generated from ADNI have helped elucidate some of the 
pathophysiological mechanisms underpinning aging and AD pathology, while 
contributing to the international effort in setting the groundwork for biomarker 
discovery and establishing standards for early diagnosis of AD.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-014-0062-5
PMCID: PMC4255533
PMID: 25478022


68. Alzheimers Dement. 2015 Sep;11(9):1050-68. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.09.004. Epub 
2014 Nov 24.

The influence of biological and technical factors on quantitative analysis of 
amyloid PET: Points to consider and recommendations for controlling variability 
in longitudinal data.

Schmidt ME(1), Chiao P(2), Klein G(3), Matthews D(4), Thurfjell L(5), Cole 
PE(6), Margolin R(7), Landau S(8), Foster NL(9), Mason NS(10), De Santi S(11), 
Suhy J(3), Koeppe RA(12), Jagust W(8); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Janssen Pharmaceutica, Beerse, Belgium. Electronic address: 
mschmid4@its.jnj.com.
(2)Biogen IDEC, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Synarc, Newark, CA, USA.
(4)ADM Diagnostics LLC, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden.
(6)Takeda Pharmaceuticals, Deerfield, IL, USA.
(7)CereSpir, Inc., New York, NY, USA.
(8)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(9)Division of Cognitive Neurology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(10)Department of Radiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(11)Piramal Imaging, Boston, MA, USA.
(12)Division of Nuclear Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

In vivo imaging of amyloid burden with positron emission tomography (PET) 
provides a means for studying the pathophysiology of Alzheimer's and related 
diseases. Measurement of subtle changes in amyloid burden requires quantitative 
analysis of image data. Reliable quantitative analysis of amyloid PET scans 
acquired at multiple sites and over time requires rigorous standardization of 
acquisition protocols, subject management, tracer administration, image quality 
control, and image processing and analysis methods. We review critical points in 
the acquisition and analysis of amyloid PET, identify ways in which technical 
factors can contribute to measurement variability, and suggest methods for 
mitigating these sources of noise. Improved quantitative accuracy could reduce 
the sample size necessary to detect intervention effects when amyloid PET is 
used as a treatment end point and allow more reliable interpretation of change 
in amyloid burden and its relationship to clinical course.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.09.004
PMID: 25457431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Alzheimers Dement. 2014 Feb;10(1 Suppl):S84-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.09.015.

Creation of the Argentina-Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Russo MJ, Gustafson D, Vázquez S, Surace E, Guinjoan S, Allegri RF, Sevlever G; 
Argentina-Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Méndez PC, Campos J, Martin ME, Martinetto H, Ventrice F, 
Amengual A, Suarez MF, Russo G, Cohen G, Clarens MF, Harris P, Riudavets M.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) is a multisite, 
longitudinal study that assesses clinical, imaging, genetic, and biospecimen 
biomarkers through the process of normal aging to mild cognitive impairment and 
dementia. We present the creation of the Argentina-ADNI - the first South 
American ADNI - and its effort to acquire data comparable with those gathered in 
other worldwide ADNI centers.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.09.015
PMID: 24864324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Brain Imaging Behav. 2014 Jun;8(2):183-207. doi: 10.1007/s11682-013-9262-z.

Genetic analysis of quantitative phenotypes in AD and MCI: imaging, cognition 
and biomarkers.

Shen L(1), Thompson PM, Potkin SG, Bertram L, Farrer LA, Foroud TM, Green RC, Hu 
X, Huentelman MJ, Kim S, Kauwe JS, Li Q, Liu E, Macciardi F, Moore JH, Munsie L, 
Nho K, Ramanan VK, Risacher SL, Stone DJ, Swaminathan S, Toga AW, Weiner MW, 
Saykin AJ; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neuroimaging and Indiana Alzheimer's Disease Center, Department of 
Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, 355 W 
16th Street, Suite 4100, Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA, shenli@iu.edu.

The Genetics Core of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), 
formally established in 2009, aims to provide resources and facilitate research 
related to genetic predictors of multidimensional Alzheimer's disease 
(AD)-related phenotypes. Here, we provide a systematic review of genetic studies 
published between 2009 and 2012 where either ADNI APOE genotype or genome-wide 
association study (GWAS) data were used. We review and synthesize ADNI genetic 
associations with disease status or quantitative disease endophenotypes 
including structural and functional neuroimaging, fluid biomarker assays, and 
cognitive performance. We also discuss the diverse analytical strategies used in 
these studies, including univariate and multivariate analysis, meta-analysis, 
pathway analysis, and interaction and network analysis. Finally, we perform 
pathway and network enrichment analyses of these ADNI genetic associations to 
highlight key mechanisms that may drive disease onset and trajectory. Major ADNI 
findings included all the top 10 AD genes and several of these (e.g., APOE, 
BIN1, CLU, CR1, and PICALM) were corroborated by ADNI imaging, fluid and 
cognitive phenotypes. ADNI imaging genetics studies discovered novel findings 
(e.g., FRMD6) that were later replicated on different data sets. Several other 
genes (e.g., APOC1, FTO, GRIN2B, MAGI2, and TOMM40) were associated with 
multiple ADNI phenotypes, warranting further investigation on other data sets. 
The broad availability and wide scope of ADNI genetic and phenotypic data has 
advanced our understanding of the genetic basis of AD and has nominated novel 
targets for future studies employing next-generation sequencing and convergent 
multi-omics approaches, and for clinical drug and biomarker development.

DOI: 10.1007/s11682-013-9262-z
PMCID: PMC3976843
PMID: 24092460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Jan 1;87(1):172-88. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.08.026. Epub 
2013 Aug 31.

Biomarkers in pharmacology and drug discovery.

Anderson DC(1), Kodukula K(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Advanced Drug Research, SRI International, Harrisonburg, VA 22802, 
USA. Electronic address: dave.anderson@sri.com.
(2)Center for Advanced Drug Research, SRI International, Harrisonburg, VA 22802, 
USA; Departments of Biology, and Chemistry and Biochemistry, James Madison 
University, Harrisonburg, VA 22802, USA.

Biomarkers, quantitatively measurable indicators of biological or pathogenic 
processes, once validated play a critical role in disease diagnostics, the 
prediction of disease progression, and/or monitoring of the response to 
treatment. They may also represent drug targets. A number of different methods 
can be used for biomarker discovery and validation, including proteomics 
methods, metabolomics, imaging, and genome wide association studies (GWASs) and 
can be analysed using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) plots. The 
relative utility of single biomarkers compared to biomarker panels is discussed, 
along with paradigms for biomarker development, the latter in the context of 
three large-scale biomarker consortia, the Critical Path Predictive Safety 
Testing Consortium (PSTC), the NCI Early Detection Research Network (EDRN) and 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). The importance of 
systematic optimization of many parameters in biomarker analysis, including 
validation, reproducibility, study design, statistical analysis and avoidance of 
bias are critical features used by these consortia. Problems including 
introduction of bias into study designs, data reporting or data analysis are 
also reviewed.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.08.026
PMID: 24001556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Neuroimage. 2014 Nov 15;102 Pt 1:192-206. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.08.015. 
Epub 2013 Aug 27.

Bi-level multi-source learning for heterogeneous block-wise missing data.

Xiang S(1), Yuan L(1), Fan W(2), Wang Y(3), Thompson PM(4), Ye J(5); Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona 
State University, Tempe, AZ, USA; Center for Evolutionary Medicine and 
Informatics, The Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(2)Huawei Noah's Ark Lab, Hong Kong.
(3)School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona 
State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(4)Imaging Genetics Center, Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Department of Neurology 
& Psychiatry, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona 
State University, Tempe, AZ, USA; Center for Evolutionary Medicine and 
Informatics, The Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. 
Electronic address: jieping.ye@asu.edu.

Bio-imaging technologies allow scientists to collect large amounts of 
high-dimensional data from multiple heterogeneous sources for many biomedical 
applications. In the study of Alzheimer's Disease (AD), neuroimaging data, 
gene/protein expression data, etc., are often analyzed together to improve 
predictive power. Joint learning from multiple complementary data sources is 
advantageous, but feature-pruning and data source selection are critical to 
learn interpretable models from high-dimensional data. Often, the data collected 
has block-wise missing entries. In the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI), most subjects have MRI and genetic information, but only half 
have cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) measures, a different half has FDG-PET; only some 
have proteomic data. Here we propose how to effectively integrate information 
from multiple heterogeneous data sources when data is block-wise missing. We 
present a unified "bi-level" learning model for complete multi-source data, and 
extend it to incomplete data. Our major contributions are: (1) our proposed 
models unify feature-level and source-level analysis, including several existing 
feature learning approaches as special cases; (2) the model for incomplete data 
avoids imputing missing data and offers superior performance; it generalizes to 
other applications with block-wise missing data sources; (3) we present 
efficient optimization algorithms for modeling complete and incomplete data. We 
comprehensively evaluate the proposed models including all ADNI subjects with at 
least one of four data types at baseline: MRI, FDG-PET, CSF and proteomics. Our 
proposed models compare favorably with existing approaches.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.08.015
PMCID: PMC3937297
PMID: 23988272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Alzheimers Dement. 2013 Sep;9(5):e111-94. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.05.1769. Epub 
2013 Aug 7.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative: a review of papers published 
since its inception.

Weiner MW(1), Veitch DP, Aisen PS, Beckett LA, Cairns NJ, Green RC, Harvey D, 
Jack CR, Jagust W, Liu E, Morris JC, Petersen RC, Saykin AJ, Schmidt ME, Shaw L, 
Shen L, Siuciak JA, Soares H, Toga AW, Trojanowski JQ; Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA. michael.weiner@ucsf.edu

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) is an ongoing, 
longitudinal, multicenter study designed to develop clinical, imaging, genetic, 
and biochemical biomarkers for the early detection and tracking of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). The study aimed to enroll 400 subjects with early mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), 200 subjects with early AD, and 200 normal control subjects; 
$67 million funding was provided by both the public and private sectors, 
including the National Institute on Aging, 13 pharmaceutical companies, and 2 
foundations that provided support through the Foundation for the National 
Institutes of Health. This article reviews all papers published since the 
inception of the initiative and summarizes the results as of February 2011. The 
major accomplishments of ADNI have been as follows: (1) the development of 
standardized methods for clinical tests, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
positron emission tomography (PET), and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers in 
a multicenter setting; (2) elucidation of the patterns and rates of change of 
imaging and CSF biomarker measurements in control subjects, MCI patients, and AD 
patients. CSF biomarkers are consistent with disease trajectories predicted by 
β-amyloid cascade (Hardy, J Alzheimers Dis 2006;9(Suppl 3):151-3) and 
tau-mediated neurodegeneration hypotheses for AD, whereas brain atrophy and 
hypometabolism levels show predicted patterns but exhibit differing rates of 
change depending on region and disease severity; (3) the assessment of 
alternative methods of diagnostic categorization. Currently, the best 
classifiers combine optimum features from multiple modalities, including MRI, 
[(18)F]-fluorodeoxyglucose-PET, CSF biomarkers, and clinical tests; (4) the 
development of methods for the early detection of AD. CSF biomarkers, β-amyloid 
42 and tau, as well as amyloid PET may reflect the earliest steps in AD 
pathology in mildly symptomatic or even nonsymptomatic subjects, and are leading 
candidates for the detection of AD in its preclinical stages; (5) the 
improvement of clinical trial efficiency through the identification of subjects 
most likely to undergo imminent future clinical decline and the use of more 
sensitive outcome measures to reduce sample sizes. Baseline cognitive and/or MRI 
measures generally predicted future decline better than other modalities, 
whereas MRI measures of change were shown to be the most efficient outcome 
measures; (6) the confirmation of the AD risk loci CLU, CR1, and PICALM and the 
identification of novel candidate risk loci; (7) worldwide impact through the 
establishment of ADNI-like programs in Europe, Asia, and Australia; (8) 
understanding the biology and pathobiology of normal aging, MCI, and AD through 
integration of ADNI biomarker data with clinical data from ADNI to stimulate 
research that will resolve controversies about competing hypotheses on the 
etiopathogenesis of AD, thereby advancing efforts to find disease-modifying 
drugs for AD; and (9) the establishment of infrastructure to allow sharing of 
all raw and processed data without embargo to interested scientific 
investigators throughout the world. The ADNI study was extended by a 2-year 
Grand Opportunities grant in 2009 and a renewal of ADNI (ADNI-2) in October 2010 
through to 2016, with enrollment of an additional 550 participants.

Copyright © 2013 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.05.1769
PMCID: PMC4108198
PMID: 23932184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: please refer to section 
8. Disclosures.


74. Prog Neurobiol. 2013 Sep;108:21-43. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.06.004. Epub 
2013 Jul 11.

Decoding Alzheimer's disease from perturbed cerebral glucose metabolism: 
implications for diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.

Chen Z(1), Zhong C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an age-related devastating neurodegenerative 
disorder, which severely impacts on the global economic development and 
healthcare system. Though AD has been studied for more than 100 years since 
1906, the exact cause(s) and pathogenic mechanism(s) remain to be clarified. 
Also, the efficient disease-modifying treatment and ideal diagnostic method for 
AD are unavailable. Perturbed cerebral glucose metabolism, an invariant 
pathophysiological feature of AD, may be a critical contributor to the 
pathogenesis of this disease. In this review, we firstly discussed the features 
of cerebral glucose metabolism in physiological and pathological conditions. 
Then, we further reviewed the contribution of glucose transportation abnormality 
and intracellular glucose catabolism dysfunction in AD pathophysiology, and 
proposed a hypothesis that multiple pathogenic cascades induced by impaired 
cerebral glucose metabolism could result in neuronal degeneration and 
consequently cognitive deficits in AD patients. Among these pathogenic 
processes, altered functional status of thiamine metabolism and brain insulin 
resistance are highly emphasized and characterized as major pathogenic 
mechanisms. Finally, considering the fact that AD patients exhibit cerebral 
glucose hypometabolism possibly due to impairments of insulin signaling and 
altered thiamine metabolism, we also discuss some potential possibilities to 
uncover diagnostic biomarkers for AD from abnormal glucose metabolism and to 
develop drugs targeting at repairing insulin signaling impairment and correcting 
thiamine metabolism abnormality. We conclude that glucose metabolism abnormality 
plays a critical role in AD pathophysiological alterations through the induction 
of multiple pathogenic factors such as oxidative stress, mitochondrial 
dysfunction, and so forth. To clarify the causes, pathogeneses and consequences 
of cerebral hypometabolism in AD will help break the bottleneck of current AD 
study in finding ideal diagnostic biomarker and disease-modifying therapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.06.004
PMID: 23850509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Contemp Clin Trials. 2013 Nov;36(2):616-23. doi: 10.1016/j.cct.2013.06.012. Epub 
2013 Jun 29.

Personalized medicine in Alzheimer's disease and depression.

Souslova T(1), Marple TC, Spiekerman AM, Mohammad AA.

Author information:
(1)Scott & White Healthcare, Department of Clinical Pathology, 2401, South 31st 
Street, Temple, TX 76508, USA. Electronic address: tsouslova@acmlab.com.

Latest research in the mental health field brings new hope to patients and 
promises to revolutionize the field of psychiatry. Personalized pharmacogenetic 
tests that aid in diagnosis and treatment choice are now becoming available for 
clinical practice. Amyloid beta peptide biomarkers in the cerebrospinal fluid of 
patients with Alzheimer's disease are now available. For the first time, 
radiologists are able to visualize amyloid plaques specific to Alzheimer's 
disease in live patients using Positron Emission Tomography-based tests approved 
by the FDA. A novel blood-based assay has been developed to aid in the diagnosis 
of depression based on activation of the HPA axis, metabolic, inflammatory and 
neurochemical pathways. Serotonin reuptake inhibitors have shown increased 
remission rates in specific ethnic subgroups and Cytochrome P450 gene 
polymorphisms can predict antidepressant tolerability. The latest research will 
help to eradicate "trial and error" prescription, ushering in the most 
personalized medicine to date. Like all major medical breakthroughs, integration 
of new algorithms and technologies requires sound science and time. But for many 
mentally ill patients, diagnosis and effective therapy cannot happen fast 
enough. This review will describe the newest diagnostic tests, treatments and 
clinical studies for the diagnosis and treatment of Alzheimer's disease and 
unipolar, major depressive disorder.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cct.2013.06.012
PMID: 23816492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Prog Neurobiol. 2013 Nov;110:102-13. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.01.003. Epub 
2013 Apr 8.

Diagnosis and management of Alzheimer's disease: past, present and future 
ethical issues.

Gauthier S(1), Leuzy A, Racine E, Rosa-Neto P.

Author information:
(1)McGill Center for Studies in Aging, Douglas Mental Health Research Institute, 
Montréal, Québec, Canada. Electronic address: serge.gauthier@mcgill.ca.

There is great interest in the ethical issues associated with Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) and related dementias given the prevalence of AD and the evolving 
neuroscience landscape in matters of diagnoses and therapeutics. Much of the 
ethics discussion arises in the tension between the principle of not doing harm 
(principle of non-maleficence) in this vulnerable population and the development 
of effective treatments (principle of beneficence). Autonomy and capacity issues 
are also numerous, wide-ranging, and concern (1) day to day affairs such as 
driving safely and spending money wisely, (2) life-time events such as 
designating a legal representative in case of incapacity, making a will, (3) 
consenting to treatment and diagnostic procedures, (4) participating in 
research. The latter issue is particularly thorny and illustrates well the 
complexity of tackling concerns related to capacity. The impetus to protect AD 
patients has partly led to ethics regulation and policies making research on 
inapt patients more difficult because of stringent requirements for signed 
informed consent or for showing the value of the research to this specific 
patient population. New issues are arising that relate to earlier diagnosis 
using biomarkers and (possibly soon) the use of drugs that modify disease 
progression. We here summarize and discuss the different ethical issues 
associated with AD from a historical perspective, with emphasis on diagnostic 
and treatments issues.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.01.003
PMID: 23578568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Prog Neurobiol. 2013 Nov;110:114-23. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2012.12.001. Epub 
2013 Jan 21.

A conceptual framework and ethics analysis for prevention trials of Alzheimer 
Disease.

Peters KR(1), Lynn Beattie B, Feldman HH, Illes J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Trent University, Peterborough, ON, Canada. 
Electronic address: kevinpeters@trentu.ca.

As our understanding of the neurobiology of Alzheimer Disease deepens, it has 
become evident that early intervention is critical to achieving successful 
therapeutic impact. The availability of diagnostic criteria for preclinical 
Alzheimer Disease adds momentum to research directed at this goal and even to 
prevention. The landscape of therapeutic research is thus poised to undergo a 
dramatic shift in the next 5-10 years, with clinical trials involving subjects 
at risk for Alzheimer Disease who have few or no symptoms. These trials will 
also likely rely heavily on genetics, biomarkers, and or risk factor 
stratification to identify individuals at risk for Alzheimer Disease. Here, we 
propose a conceptual framework to guide this next generation of pharmacological 
and non-pharmacological clinical pursuit, and discuss some of the foreseeable 
ethical considerations that may accompany them.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2012.12.001
PMID: 23348495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Alzheimers Dement. 2012 Jul;8(4):337-42. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.04.007.

Worldwide Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative.

Carrillo MC(1), Bain LJ, Frisoni GB, Weiner MW.

Author information:
(1)Medical & Scientific Relations, Alzheimer's Association, Chicago, IL, USA. 
Maria.Carrillo@alz.org

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) was launched in 2003 to 
speed drug development by validating imaging and blood/cerebrospinal fluid 
biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease clinical treatment trials. ADNI is a 
naturalistic (nontreatment) multisite longitudinal study. A true public-private 
partnership, the first phase of ADNI (ADNI 1) set a new standard for data 
sharing without embargo. In addition, it has been extended to 2017 by additional 
funding (North American-ADNI Grand Opportunities and ADNI 2) as well as multiple 
projects around the world, collectively known as Worldwide ADNI (WW-ADNI). The 
goal of WW-ADNI is to harmonize projects and results across different 
geographical sites and to encourage and harmonize data management and 
availability to investigators around the world. WW-ADNI projects are currently 
underway in North America, Europe, Japan, Australia, Korea, Taiwan, and 
Argentina, with a nascent program in China and a possible future program in 
Brazil.

Copyright © 2012 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.04.007
PMID: 22748939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Chang Gung Med J. 2012 May-Jun;35(3):211-8. doi: 10.4103/2319-4170.106151.

Amyloid plaque imaging from IMPY/SPECT to AV-45/PET.

Kung MP(1), Weng CC, Lin KJ, Hsiao IT, Yen TC, Wey SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Imaging and Radiological Sciences, College of Medicine, 
Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. kungmp@gmail.com

The formation and deposition of β-amyloid (Aβ) plaques are the earliest 
pathological changes in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Molecular imaging of Aβ 
plaques could serve as a surrogate marker in early diagnosis and 
neuropathogenesis studies of AD. Several radionuclide labeled ligands have 
recently been developed for noninvasive visualization of Aβ plaques in the 
brains of AD patients using single photon emission computed tomography or 
positron emission tomography (PET). There has been rapid progress in the field 
of imaging for plaque pathology. AV-45 was the first plaque imaging agent to 
enter multi-center, investigational new drug clinical trials in the US, and has 
now been studied in dozens of trials with more than 1,000 subjects ranging from 
cognitively normal individuals to those with AD dementia. "Imaging to autopsy" 
phase III studies further confirmed and validated the specific imaging signal 
correlated to the plaque burden in living subjects. With these promising and 
confirmed characteristics of AV-45, the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) under common consensus decided on AV-45 as the emerging 
standard PET imaging agent for evaluating the progression of plaque pathology in 
patients with AD or mild cognition impairment, and even healthy controls. With 
the wide availability of AV-45 for plaque imaging, the ultimate goal of the ADNI 
is global clinical trials for disease detection and progression. This review 
presents recent experience with Aβ-targeting radiotracers at Chang Gung 
University and Chang Gung Memorial Hospital.

DOI: 10.4103/2319-4170.106151
PMID: 22735052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2013 Dec 2;47:162-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2012.06.011. Epub 2012 Jun 21.

Anesthesia, surgery, illness and Alzheimer's disease.

Eckenhoff RG(1), Laudansky KF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology & Critical Care, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: 
Roderic.Eckenhoff@uphs.upenn.edu.

Patients and their families have, for many decades, detected subtle changes in 
cognition subsequent to surgery, and only recently has this been subjected to 
scientific scrutiny. Through a combination of retrospective human studies, small 
prospective biomarker studies, and experiments in animals, it is now clear that 
durable consequences of both anesthesia and surgery occur, and that these 
intersect with the normal processes of aging, and the abnormal processes of 
chronic neurodegeneration. It is highly likely that inflammatory cascades are at 
the heart of this intersection, and if confirmed, this suggests a therapeutic 
strategy to mitigate enhanced neuropathology in vulnerable surgical patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2012.06.011
PMCID: PMC3509241
PMID: 22729032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Brain Nerve. 2012 May;64(5):497-504.

[Biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease: after Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging 
initiative studies].

[Article in Japanese]

Shoji M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Japan.

Recent advances in biomarker studies compiled from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) are summarized here. CSF Aβ42, total tau, and 
phosphorylated tau181 are the most sensitive biomarkers for diagnosing 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and predicting the onset of AD in cases with mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) due to AD. Many perspective studies on PiB-PET, 
FDG-PET, MRI volumetry, and some neuropsychiatric tests have provided evidence 
for the usefulness of these biomarkers for diagnosing AD and MCI due to AD. 
Basic and clinical studies have contributed considerably to the establishment of 
clinical evidence that supports the usefulness of these markers. Given the 
progress in the diagnosis of preclinical AD, discovery of therapy that is 
essential for the cure of AD is expected soon.

PMID: 22570063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Alzheimers Dement. 2012 Feb;8(1 Suppl):S1-68. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.09.172. 
Epub 2011 Nov 2.

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative: a review of papers published 
since its inception.

Weiner MW(1), Veitch DP, Aisen PS, Beckett LA, Cairns NJ, Green RC, Harvey D, 
Jack CR, Jagust W, Liu E, Morris JC, Petersen RC, Saykin AJ, Schmidt ME, Shaw L, 
Siuciak JA, Soares H, Toga AW, Trojanowski JQ; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA. michael.weiner@ucsf.edu

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) is an ongoing, 
longitudinal, multicenter study designed to develop clinical, imaging, genetic, 
and biochemical biomarkers for the early detection and tracking of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). The study aimed to enroll 400 subjects with early mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), 200 subjects with early AD, and 200 normal control subjects; 
$67 million funding was provided by both the public and private sectors, 
including the National Institute on Aging, 13 pharmaceutical companies, and 2 
foundations that provided support through the Foundation for the National 
Institutes of Health. This article reviews all papers published since the 
inception of the initiative and summarizes the results as of February 2011. The 
major accomplishments of ADNI have been as follows: (1) the development of 
standardized methods for clinical tests, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
positron emission tomography (PET), and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers in 
a multicenter setting; (2) elucidation of the patterns and rates of change of 
imaging and CSF biomarker measurements in control subjects, MCI patients, and AD 
patients. CSF biomarkers are consistent with disease trajectories predicted by 
β-amyloid cascade (Hardy, J Alzheimers Dis 2006;9(Suppl 3):151-3) and 
tau-mediated neurodegeneration hypotheses for AD, whereas brain atrophy and 
hypometabolism levels show predicted patterns but exhibit differing rates of 
change depending on region and disease severity; (3) the assessment of 
alternative methods of diagnostic categorization. Currently, the best 
classifiers combine optimum features from multiple modalities, including MRI, 
[(18)F]-fluorodeoxyglucose-PET, CSF biomarkers, and clinical tests; (4) the 
development of methods for the early detection of AD. CSF biomarkers, β-amyloid 
42 and tau, as well as amyloid PET may reflect the earliest steps in AD 
pathology in mildly symptomatic or even nonsymptomatic subjects, and are leading 
candidates for the detection of AD in its preclinical stages; (5) the 
improvement of clinical trial efficiency through the identification of subjects 
most likely to undergo imminent future clinical decline and the use of more 
sensitive outcome measures to reduce sample sizes. Baseline cognitive and/or MRI 
measures generally predicted future decline better than other modalities, 
whereas MRI measures of change were shown to be the most efficient outcome 
measures; (6) the confirmation of the AD risk loci CLU, CR1, and PICALM and the 
identification of novel candidate risk loci; (7) worldwide impact through the 
establishment of ADNI-like programs in Europe, Asia, and Australia; (8) 
understanding the biology and pathobiology of normal aging, MCI, and AD through 
integration of ADNI biomarker data with clinical data from ADNI to stimulate 
research that will resolve controversies about competing hypotheses on the 
etiopathogenesis of AD, thereby advancing efforts to find disease-modifying 
drugs for AD; and (9) the establishment of infrastructure to allow sharing of 
all raw and processed data without embargo to interested scientific 
investigators throughout the world. The ADNI study was extended by a 2-year 
Grand Opportunities grant in 2009 and a renewal of ADNI (ADNI-2) in October 2010 
through to 2016, with enrollment of an additional 550 participants.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.09.172
PMCID: PMC3329969
PMID: 22047634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Seishin Shinkeigaku Zasshi. 2011;113(6):584-92.

[Current topics about mild cognitive impairment (MCI)].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamamoto Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Kobe Graduate School of Medicine.

One hundred years has passed since the appearance of the first article on 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), by Alois Alzheimer. AD is the most common form of 
dementia, accounting for over 50% of all dementia and affecting more than 26 
million people worldwide. Since the 1980s, the pace of research into the nature 
of AD has greatly accelerated, and investigators currently believe that it will 
become possible to treat or prevent AD, which is a major socioeconomic concern 
in all developed countries of the world. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a 
relatively recent term used to describe people who have some memory problems, 
but do not actually have dementia. In recent years, some drug treatments that 
can improve the symptoms of AD have become available. Other treatments that may 
slow down the progression of AD in the brain are also being developed. It is 
important that people with AD be identified as early as possible, so that they 
can benefit from these treatments in the future. Identifying people with MCI is 
one way to try to achieve this. In Japan, the Japanese Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (J-ADNI) was launched in 2008. It follows the protocols 
established by US-ADNI, and aims to conduct a longitudinal workup of 
standardized neuroimaging, biomarker, and clinico-psychological surveys. The 
Japanese research protocol was designed to maximize compatibility with that of 
US-ADNI, including structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) analysis for the 
evaluation of brain atrophy, fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and amyloid positron 
emission tomography (PIB-PET), cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sampling, and APOE 
genotyping, as well as a set of clinical and psychometric tests that were 
prepared so as to achieve the greatest compatibility possible with those used in 
US-ADNI. J-ADNI has recruited approximately 357 participants (142 with amnestic 
mild cognitive impairment, some 134 elders without impairment, and 72 persons 
with mild Alzheimer's disease) as of April 15, 2010. Worldwide ADNI activities 
will allow the establishment of rigorous quantitative descriptions of the 
natural course of AD in its very early stages. In addition, this project will 
aid in the clarification and differentiation of MCI and AD. The major goal of 
this research is the establishment of surrogate markers for AD based on MRI, 
PET, and CSF data. This data, as well as the methodologies and infrastructure 
used, will facilitate clinical trials of disease-modifying therapies for AD 
using surrogate biomarkers, enabling the application of effective therapies with 
AD/MCI patients, and eventually the prevention of AD. In this symposium, I will 
speak about MCI and early-stage AD, with a particular focus on the latest 
clinical neuroimaging data from J-ADNI.

PMID: 21815470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Future Opportunities to Leverage the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative: Workshop Summary.

Institute of Medicine (US) Forum on Neuroscience and Nervous System Disorders.

Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2011.
The National Academies Collection: Reports funded by National Institutes of 
Health.

At the request of the Alzheimer’s Association, the Institute of Medicine’s 
(IOM’s) Forum on Neuroscience and Nervous System Disorders planned and hosted a 
2-hour public workshop at the 2010 International Conference on Alzheimer’s 
Disease (ICAD). Held in Honolulu, HI, on July 12, 2010, the session was designed 
to explore future opportunities to leverage the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI), with particular focus on the second phase of the ADNI 
project, ADNI 2. Panelists from industry, academia, and government examined the 
key elements of success of the research partnerships established as a result of 
ADNI, and contemplated the establishment of future multisector efforts to 
explore central nervous system developmental and neurodegenerative disorders. 
This report is limited to a review of workshop speaker presentations and 
commentary by panelists.

Copyright © 2011, National Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.17226/13017
PMID: 21796827


85. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2010 Jun;221(2):87-95. doi: 10.1620/tjem.221.87.

Geriatric medicine, Japanese Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative and 
biomarker development.

Arai H(1), Okamura N, Furukawa K, Kudo Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics and Gerontology, Division of Brain Science, 
Institute of Development, Aging, and Cancer, Tohoku University. FO11547/1

Due to a change in disease spectrum in aged countries, the primary role of 
geriatricians should be directed to an appropriate management and prevention of 
1) cognitive decline and dementia, 2) swallowing and aspiration pneumonia and 3) 
falls and fractures. Management of dementia constitutes a central part in the 
practice of geriatric medicine in order to support independence of life in 
elderly people. The current paradigm of cognitive function-based testing for the 
diagnosis and treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is going to drastically 
shift to a biomarker-based test approach, a shift that will correspond to the 
emergence of disease-modifying drugs. In addition, a new molecular imaging 
technique that visualizes neuronal protein deposits or pathological features has 
been developed in Japan and the U.S.A. Based on these achievements, the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) was proposed and initiated in 
2005. The ADNI is a long-term observational study being conducted in the U.S.A., 
Europe, Australia, and Japan using identical protocols. The objectives of ADNI 
are: 1) to establish methodology which will allow standard values related to 
long-term changes in imaging data, such as MRI and PET, in patients with AD and 
mild cognitive impairment and normal elderly persons; 2) to obtain clinical 
indices, psychological test data, and blood/cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers to 
demonstrate the validity of image-based surrogate markers; and 3) to establish 
optimum methods to monitor the therapeutic effects of disease-modifying drugs 
for AD. Patient enrollment in the Japanese ADNI has begun in July 2008. Imaging 
of AD pathology not only acts as a reliable biomarker with which to assay 
curative drug development by novel pharmaceutical companies, but it also helps 
health promotion toward AD prevention.

DOI: 10.1620/tjem.221.87
PMID: 20467230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Alzheimers Dement. 2010 May;6(3):239-46. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2010.03.006.

Clinical Core of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative: progress and 
plans.

Aisen PS(1), Petersen RC, Donohue MC, Gamst A, Raman R, Thomas RG, Walter S, 
Trojanowski JQ, Shaw LM, Beckett LA, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Toga AW, Saykin AJ, 
Morris JC, Green RC, Weiner MW; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, CA, USA. 
paisen@ucsd.edu

The Clinical Core of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) has 
provided clinical, operational, and data management support to ADNI since its 
inception. This article reviews the activities and accomplishments of the core 
in support of ADNI aims. These include the enrollment and follow-up of more than 
800 subjects in the three original cohorts: healthy controls, amnestic mild 
cognitive impairment (now referred to as late MCI, or LMCI), and mild 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) in the first phase of ADNI (ADNI 1), with baseline 
longitudinal, clinical, and cognitive assessments. These data, when combined 
with genetic, neuroimaging, and cerebrospinal fluid measures, have provided 
important insights into the neurobiology of the AD spectrum. Furthermore, these 
data have facilitated the development of novel clinical trial designs. ADNI has 
recently been extended with funding from an NIH Grand Opportunities (GO) award, 
and the new ADNI GO phase has been launched; this includes the enrollment of a 
new cohort, called early MCI, with milder episodic memory impairment than the 
LMCI group. An application for a further 5 years of ADNI funding (ADNI 2) was 
recently submitted. This funding would support ongoing follow-up of the original 
ADNI 1 and ADNI GO cohorts, as well as additional recruitment into all 
categories. The resulting data would provide valuable data on the earliest 
stages of AD, and support the development of interventions in these critically 
important populations.

Copyright 2010 The Alzheimer

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2010.03.006
PMCID: PMC2867843
PMID: 20451872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Alzheimers Dement. 2010 May;6(3):230-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2010.03.008.

Update on the biomarker core of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
subjects.

Trojanowski JQ(1), Vandeerstichele H, Korecka M, Clark CM, Aisen PS, Petersen 
RC, Blennow K, Soares H, Simon A, Lewczuk P, Dean R, Siemers E, Potter WZ, 
Weiner MW, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Toga AW, Lee VM, Shaw LM; Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Institute on Aging, Center for 
Neurodegenerative Disease Research, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA. trojanow@mail.med.upenn.edu

Here, we review progress by the Penn Biomarker Core in the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) toward developing a pathological cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) and plasma biomarker signature for mild Alzheimer's disease (AD) as 
well as a biomarker profile that predicts conversion of mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) and/or normal control subjects to AD. The Penn Biomarker Core 
also collaborated with other ADNI Cores to integrate data across ADNI to 
temporally order changes in clinical measures, imaging data, and chemical 
biomarkers that serve as mileposts and predictors of the conversion of normal 
control to MCI as well as MCI to AD, and the progression of AD. Initial CSF 
studies by the ADNI Biomarker Core revealed a pathological CSF biomarker 
signature of AD defined by the combination of Abeta1-42 and total tau (T-tau) 
that effectively delineates mild AD in the large multisite prospective clinical 
investigation conducted in ADNI. This signature appears to predict conversion 
from MCI to AD. Data fusion efforts across ADNI Cores generated a model for the 
temporal ordering of AD biomarkers which suggests that Abeta amyloid biomarkers 
become abnormal first, followed by changes in neurodegenerative biomarkers (CSF 
tau, F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography, magnetic resonance 
imaging) with the onset of clinical symptoms. The timing of these changes varies 
in individual patients due to genetic and environmental factors that increase or 
decrease an individual's resilience in response to progressive accumulations of 
AD pathologies. Further studies in ADNI will refine this model and render the 
biomarkers studied in ADNI more applicable to routine diagnosis and to clinical 
trials of disease modifying therapies.

Copyright 2010 The Alzheimer

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2010.03.008
PMCID: PMC2867838
PMID: 20451871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Alzheimers Dement. 2010 May;6(3):212-20. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2010.03.004.

Update on the magnetic resonance imaging core of the Alzheimer's disease 
neuroimaging initiative.

Jack CR Jr(1), Bernstein MA, Borowski BJ, Gunter JL, Fox NC, Thompson PM, Schuff 
N, Krueger G, Killiany RJ, Decarli CS, Dale AM, Carmichael OW, Tosun D, Weiner 
MW; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. 
jack.clifford@mayo.edu

Functions of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) core fall into three categories: (1) those of the 
central MRI core laboratory at Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, needed to 
generate high quality MRI data in all subjects at each time point; (2) those of 
the funded ADNI MRI core imaging analysis groups responsible for analyzing the 
MRI data; and (3) the joint function of the entire MRI core in designing and 
problem solving MR image acquisition, pre-processing, and analyses methods. The 
primary objective of ADNI was and continues to be improving methods for clinical 
trials in Alzheimer's disease. Our approach to the present ("ADNI-GO") and 
future ("ADNI-2," if funded) MRI protocol will be to maintain MRI methodological 
consistency in the previously enrolled "ADNI-1" subjects who are followed up 
longitudinally in ADNI-GO and ADNI-2. We will modernize and expand the MRI 
protocol for all newly enrolled ADNI-GO and ADNI-2 subjects. All newly enrolled 
subjects will be scanned at 3T with a core set of three sequence types: 3D 
T1-weighted volume, FLAIR, and a long TE gradient echo volumetric acquisition 
for micro hemorrhage detection. In addition to this core ADNI-GO and ADNI-2 
protocol, we will perform vendor-specific pilot sub-studies of arterial 
spin-labeling perfusion, resting state functional connectivity, and diffusion 
tensor imaging. One of these sequences will be added to the core protocol on 
systems from each MRI vendor. These experimental sub-studies are designed to 
demonstrate the feasibility of acquiring useful data in a multicenter (but 
single vendor) setting for these three emerging MRI applications.

Copyright 2010 The Alzheimer

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2010.03.004
PMCID: PMC2886577
PMID: 20451869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Alzheimers Dement. 2010 May;6(3):202-11.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2010.03.007.

The Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative: progress report and future 
plans.

Weiner MW(1), Aisen PS, Jack CR Jr, Jagust WJ, Trojanowski JQ, Shaw L, Saykin 
AJ, Morris JC, Cairns N, Beckett LA, Toga A, Green R, Walter S, Soares H, Snyder 
P, Siemers E, Potter W, Cole PE, Schmidt M; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Center for Imaging of Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco VA Medical 
Center, San Francisco, CA, USA. michael.weiner@ucsf.edu

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) beginning in October 
2004, is a 6-year research project that studies changes of cognition, function, 
brain structure and function, and biomarkers in elderly controls, subjects with 
mild cognitive impairment, and subjects with Alzheimer's disease (AD). A major 
goal is to determine and validate MRI, PET images, and cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF)/blood biomarkers as predictors and outcomes for use in clinical trials of 
AD treatments. Structural MRI, FDG PET, C-11 Pittsburgh compound B (PIB) PET, 
CSF measurements of amyloid beta (Abeta) and species of tau, with 
clinical/cognitive measurements were performed on elderly controls, subjects 
with mild cognitive impairment, and subjects with AD. Structural MRI shows high 
rates of brain atrophy, and has high statistical power for determining treatment 
effects. FDG PET, C-11 Pittsburgh compound B PET, and CSF measurements of Abeta 
and tau were significant predictors of cognitive decline and brain atrophy. All 
data are available at UCLA/LONI/ADNI, without embargo. ADNI-like projects 
started in Australia, Europe, Japan, and Korea. ADNI provides significant new 
information concerning the progression of AD.

Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2010.03.007
PMCID: PMC2927112
PMID: 20451868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Neurobiol Aging. 2010 Aug;31(8):1481-92. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.03.016. Epub 2010 May 5.

Integrating ADNI results into Alzheimer's disease drug development programs.

Cummings JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Mary S. Easton Center for Alzheimer's Disease Research at UCLA, Department of 
Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-7226, 
United States. jcummings@mednet.ucla.edu

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) is providing critical new 
information on biomarkers in cognitively normal elderly, persons with mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI), and patients with mild Alzheimer's disease (AD). The 
data provide insights into the progression of the pathology of AD over time, 
assist in understanding which biomarkers might be most useful in clinical 
trials, and facilitate development of disease-modifying treatments. ADNI results 
are intended to support new AD treatment development; this report considers how 
ADNI information can be integrated in AD drug development programs. 
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) amyloid beta protein (Abeta) measures can be used in 
Phase I studies to detect any short term effects on Abeta levels in the CSF. 
Phase II studies may benefit most from biomarker measures that can inform 
decisions about Phase III. CSF Abeta levels, CSF total tau and phospho-tau 
measures, fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG PET), Pittsburgh 
Compound B (PIB) amyloid imaging, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be 
employed to select patients in enriched trials or as outcomes for specific 
disease-modifying interventions. Use of biomarkers may allow Phase II trials to 
be conducted more efficiently with smaller populations of patients or shorted 
treatment times. New drug applications (NDAs) may include biomarker outcomes of 
phase III trials. ADNI patients are highly educated and are nearly all of 
Caucasian ethnicity limiting the generalizability of the results to other 
populations commonly included in global clinical trials. ADNI has inspired or 
collaborates with biomarker investigations worldwide and together these studies 
will provide biomarker information that can reduce development times and costs, 
improve drug safety, optimize drug efficacy, and bring new treatments to 
patients with or at risk for AD.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.03.016
PMCID: PMC2902618
PMID: 20447734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2009 Nov;49(11):838-40. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.49.838.

[Pre-symptomatic detection of Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive 
impairment].

[Article in Japanese]

Arai H(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University.

The clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is occasionally imprecise 
using consensus criteria for probable AD. Therefore, there is a great need for 
simple biomarkers that substantially aid early diagnosis and tract disease 
progression of AD and mild cognitive impairment. Of currently available 
biomarkers for AD, imaging markers are of particular importance based on their 
low invasiveness and reproducibility. In vivo detection of brain amyloid burden 
using positron emission tomography either by PIB or BF-227 would be quite 
attractive. In Japan, Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiatives (ADNI) has 
been launched in 2008 in accordance with US- and World-Wide ADNI. The paradigm 
of AD diagnosis and treatment would be shifted from "cognitive-based" to 
"biomarker-based" framework. The use of ideal biomarkers can remarkably speed up 
AD drug discovery by providing earliest signals of drug efficacy.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.49.838
PMID: 20030225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Behav Neurol. 2009;21(1):129-36. doi: 10.3233/BEN-2009-0241.

Applications of neuroimaging to disease-modification trials in Alzheimer's 
disease.

Fleisher AS(1), Donohue M, Chen K, Brewer JB, Aisen PS; Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, USA. 
adam.fleisher@bannerhealth.com

Critical to development of new therapies for Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the 
ability to detect clinical or pathological change over time. Clinical outcome 
measures typically used in therapeutic trials have unfortunately proven to be 
relatively variable and somewhat insensitive to change in this slowly 
progressive disease. For this reason, development of surrogate biomarkers that 
identify significant disease-associated brain changes are necessary to expedite 
treatment development in AD. Since AD pathology is present in the brain many 
years prior to clinical manifestation, ideally we want to develop biomarkers of 
disease that identify abnormal brain structure or function even prior to 
cognitive decline. Magnetic resonance imaging, fluorodeoxyglucose positron 
emission tomography, new amyloid imaging techniques, and spinal fluid markers of 
AD all have great potential to provide surrogate endpoint measures for AD 
pathology. The Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative (ADNI) was developed 
for the distinct purpose of evaluating surrogate biomarkers for drug development 
in AD. Recent evidence from ADNI demonstrates that imaging may provide more 
sensitive, and earlier, measures of disease progression than traditional 
clinical measures for powering clinical drug trials in Alzheimer's disease. This 
review discusses recently presented data from the ADNI dataset, and the 
importance of imaging in the future of drug development in AD.

DOI: 10.3233/BEN-2009-0241
PMCID: PMC5444278
PMID: 19847051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Behav Neurol. 2009;21(1):21-8. doi: 10.3233/BEN-2009-0226.

Fully-automated volumetric MRI with normative ranges: translation to clinical 
practice.

Brewer JB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Neurosciences, University of California, San 
Diego, CA, USA. jbrewer@ucsd.edu

Neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), are associated 
with characteristic patterns of neuropathological spread in the brain. Disease 
progression is usually accompanied by regional atrophy that can be detected 
noninvasively using structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). A wealth of 
data has demonstrated the value of quantitative measurements of regional atrophy 
in AD, suggesting that volumetric MRI (vMRI) may be a useful clinical tool. vMRI 
provides biological evidence of neurodegenerative disease in patients with 
cognitive impairment. However, several hurdles impede implementation of vMRI in 
clinical practice. These include a lack of standardized MRI acquisition 
protocols, spatial distortions in MRI data, labor-intensive vMRI methods 
susceptible to interoperator variability, a lack of normative ranges for volume 
measures, and difficulty integrating vMRI in clinical workflow. Advances in vMRI 
have resulted from multi-institutional studies of brain imaging, such as the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), and help address these 
challenges. New, fully-automated measures of brain structure volumes coupled 
with large, multi-center studies using standardized MRI protocols now allow the 
development of age-adjusted normative ranges for vMRI. Such advances are 
critical for providing physicians a framework for assessing the pattern and 
degree of regional atrophy in a patient's brain and applying vMRI in clinical 
practice.

DOI: 10.3233/BEN-2009-0226
PMCID: PMC5444284
PMID: 19847042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2008 Dec;7(6):499-511. doi: 
10.2174/187152708787122950.

Alzheimer's disease drug development: old problems require new priorities.

Becker RE(1), Greig NH.

Author information:
(1)Drug Design & Development Section, Laboratory of Neurosciences, Intramural 
Research Program, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, 
Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. rebecker2008@comcast.net

Alzheimer's disease (AD) clinical drug development and patient care depend on 
rating instruments, research designs and methods, and translations of clinical 
trial (CT) results into the clinic without support from standardized protocols 
able to control (i) random measurement error intrusions into observations, (ii) 
inaccuracy and bias introduced by clinical evaluators, (iii) conformity of 
research sites to conditions of research protocols, (iv) the ability of the CT 
to model for practitioners the most effective use of the drug with individual 
patients, and (v) other factors able to invalidate research and patient care 
data. This relaxed attitude with regard to AD methods may be changing now with 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) evidence that carefully 
standardized protocols are needed to validate biomarkers for use in AD 
diagnosis, drug development, and patient care. In the fields of psychiatry and 
AD, recent studies have detected serious inaccuracies, imprecision, biases and 
compromises of study protocols able to invalidate CT outcome data and 
conclusions drawn from these data. This limited but troubling evidence 
reinforces ADNI calls for more detailed methodological protocols. Based on the 
limits to precision and accuracy associated with rated outcomes in CTs and 
patient care, we call for priority to be given to the qualification and use of 
biomarkers as outcome variables in AD drug development and patient care and, to 
insure effective uses of biomarkers, to development of protocol guided practices 
being modeled in ADNI research. To meet clinical pharmacology's therapeutic aims 
we conclude that AD CTs need to set for clinicians the conditions of use of 
drugs shown efficacious, biomarker surrogate endpoints as drug targets, and not 
to function merely as tests for efficacy conducted under field conditions 
determined by current clinical practices.

DOI: 10.2174/187152708787122950
PMCID: PMC5175454
PMID: 19128207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We have no conflicts of interest